Verbatim capture of the Internet Archive OCR plain text (the *_djvu.txt file)
of Richard Price, "An Appeal to the Public, on the Subject of the National
Debt", THE SECOND EDITION (London: Printed for T. Cadell, in the Strand,
M.DCC.LXXII [1772]). Scan of the John Carter Brown Library copy
(call number D772 .P946a).
Fetched 2026-09-01T01:59:00Z to 2026-09-01T02:00:00Z from
https://archive.org/download/appealtopublicon00pric/appealtopublicon00pric_djvu.txt
(item https://archive.org/details/appealtopublicon00pric, HTTP 200,
no access restriction; the work is public domain, published 1772).

OCR caveat, recorded honestly: this is machine OCR of an 18th-century
letterpress book set with the long s, so the text below systematically
renders long s as "f" (e.g. "intereft" for "interest"), breaks hyphenated
words across lines, and contains scattered character noise. Nothing has been
corrected here — the capture is the OCR output verbatim. Quotations taken
from this capture in notes normalize the long s and line-break hyphenation
only after cross-checking the wording word-for-word against an independent
scan of the 1772 first edition (Internet Archive item
price-an-appeal-to-the-public, fulltext_djvu.txt, fetched in the same
window), and record that normalization where they quote.

--- BEGIN VERBATIM (appealtopublicon00pric_djvu.txt, complete) ---
#■  .  '  O' 

AN 

P  P  E  A  L 

T  O 

THE  PUBLIC, 

On  the  Subject  of  the 

NATIONAL  DEBT. 


The  SECOND  EDITION. 

WITH 

An  APPENDIX,  containing  Explanatory 
Observations  and  Tables-,  and  an 
Account  of  the  prefenc  State  of  Popula¬ 
tion  in  Norfolk. 


By  RICHARD  PRICE,  D.D.  F.R.S. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  T.  Cadell,  in  the  Strand. 

M.DCC.LXXir. 

[  Price  Two  Shillings.  ] 


t 


■  ♦I 


-A, 


/  4 


'•,  '■'i 


P'./i.V'-  ■*, 


'’:A' *■ v  ^ 

V  '  /*  ' 


A  **4^  V  ^  ^  w  (T 

'  v:-;  ■.'■•  '•  t 

^  '*  •■  ’  ■‘'''  ■*•  ■'*  H  W'  f- 


/* 


^ '  \.,«»  ■■  HT'k,  .  •  v,i  ■  .■:*  *• 


-Jis.3 


1  ^ 


•.  ' 


!  . 


■T  • 

V: ' 

v  ,  ,' 

;•  ■  -  r-  / 

i,>r  V 

‘ 

■%  .'■ 

.  ..^ 

•  *  ^ 

0  9  %  ., 

r  • 

N 

•  .  • 

-  '■*♦ 

4- 

.1  '.'...  ■.* 

1  '  \ 

•  ky  </•>»■ 

4  ; 

--.  '■  '  •  ♦  - 

Ax  r 

*  k 

f' 

i..  ’JkS^..  •  4 

i  r  -f 

44  «l!  k  - 

AV.  *1^ 

•  to  J> 

■  --A.  {> 

.4 

i 

4.  1  'i'A 

_  A  *  f  •♦iki. 

•.A  ,  .\r- 

■  '  '  :  : 

■  '  j"  ■ 


I  M 


-l.'tV 


\' 


¥ 


*'  w'V'  *'  .  - 

■ . ,  ■  .  *  r  tf  ‘ / 

•  .-  -  ,  h'<' 


■^v. 


-t: 


>1  JL 


rv; 


-\ 


t1 


■i 


«  4 


•  --A 


'7 

■kF  B^K  UF*A^ 

'■  V«k-  , 

■  '  'V  ' 

^  ‘  J"'-  *•  * 

-«k..  <V' 

ift 

^  ‘0  '' 

-  -‘At 

»»  •  ’ 

4  w 

'''-ir  ^ 

■  "frl  # 

V  '•■1^  *  f 

'-  .  •  ’ 

A  A 

0 

—  .  -  .1^  ‘«y "g  "^^  "~*  ^  ” 

— .0^ 

t 

, 

■-  ■  V  : 

•  ’  i 

iV 


•  * 


>-.-.  V  >-.  ■  -  .-'^rrr  ■  ;  t.  ^"'M  • 

'  ■  "V..  .  r.m^‘ 


.  .«  •  '*  ■  *  .  -♦  ’^••-  *‘  /':** 


'•fi' 


'  '^•.- 


‘1  f 


,» 


•  •  •  ' 


’.,  ..  •  <- 

V  /  j  ■  'v*  * 


<> 


i^-  ^  ♦ 


i  (.7  A  '  !  ft 


J. 


•>  T 


iJ« 


4%  •**'• 


*.^'4 1  I 

,-*.  ’  »'»  •''  r'V  t  -* 

.  .  •  .  «  •  ^  V.  f  V  j»'-l  k  i 


^  ?  J!  -A  -  ^  .  f  j 

^  w  .  •  •A  ^ 


4  •> 


'} 


.‘I 


I  ’ 


,  /  .- 


V'  Vi  -IL 


1 


•  -♦ 


P  R  E  F 


TO  T  H 


'^C,  E 


X 


>:  t 

'  V 


S  E  C  O  N  D  E  D  I  T  I  O  nT 


IN  perufing  this  Appeal  to  the  Public,  it 
will  be  found,  that  one  of  my  chief  pur- 
vpofes  in  it  has  been  to  prove  the  following 
propolition  :  “  That  to  alienate  a  fund,  ap- 
propriated  to  the  payment  of  public  debts, 
**  while  it  can  be  avoided,  by  borrowing 
“  money  at  Ample  intereft  on  new  taxes  or 
“  favings,  is  a  moft  pernicious  meafure.” 
And  it  may  be  depended  upon,  that,  if  there 
is  any  certainty  in  numbers,  this  has  been 
proved  beyond  the  poffibiiity  of  reafonable 
doubt. 

Dr.  Davenant,  in  the  reign  of  King 
William,  warned  the  kingdom  of  the  danger 
which  would  attend  breaking  into  appro¬ 
priated  funds.  He  was  difregarded ;  and 
the  public  debts  increafed  fo  much  as  to  be 
generally  thought,  in  the  year  1716,  infup- 
fortable.  This  gave  occcalion  to  the  efta- 
blifhment,  in  that  year,  of  a  general  faving 
under  the  name  of  the  Sinking  Fund  ; 
which  repeated  laws  declared  fhould  be  ap- 


A  2 


(  ) 

plied  to  the  payment  of  the  public  debts, 
and  to  no  other  piirpofe  whatever.  This  fund 
foon  became  the  only  hope  of  the  kingdom ; 
and,  could  it  have  been  defended  againft  alie¬ 
nation,  it  would,  in  a  few  years,  have  ac- 
compliflied  all  that  was  expeded  from  it. 
Notice  was  given  of  this,  in  the  year  1726,  by 
a  writer  of  great  abilities  (^) ;  and  the  public 
was  zfecond  time  warned  of  the  fatal  confe- 
quences  which  would  follow  alienations. 
But  this  warning  was  alfo  negledled ;  and, 
in  confequence  of  this,  our  debts,  inftead  of 
being  annihilated,  as  they  might  have  been, 
have  increafed  from  17  millions,  their  amount 
in  i6^q,  and  from  ^2  millions,  their  amount 
in  1726,  to  140  millions,  their  amount 

nearly  in  the  prefent  year. - There  is  now 

one  farther  attempt  made  to  bring  back  the 
State  to  the  path  of  redtitude  and  fafety  by  a 
wiitei  indeed  of  much  lefs  weight,  but  pof- 
fefled  of  the  fame  good  intentions.  He  knows 
that  he  cannot  expedl  xo  be  regarded.  The 
fame  meafures  will  be  purfued  /  and  it  is  eafy 
to  forefee  in  what  they  will  terminate. 

In  Jrakce  the  cuflom  of  borrowing 
on  t  unds,  inftead  of  levying  money  for 
the  neceffary  fupplies  Vvdthin  the  year, 
was  begun  in  1678.  M.  Colbert  per¬ 
ceived  the  tendency  of  it ;  and  after  re- 
monftiating  againft  it  in  vain,  he  told  the 
minifters  who  advifed  it,  that  they  fliould 

(^)  See  Page  30,  &c.  of  this  Treatiie,  and  the  ex- 
tiacts  111  tllc  Appendix. 

5 


anfvver 


{  V  ) 

“  anfvver  to  God  for  the  mifchief  they  would 
“  do  to  the  king  and  the  date,  by  introduc- 

“  ing  fo  pernicious  a  pradice  [a).” - The 

managers  of  our  affairs  will  have  more  to 
anfwer  for.  They  have  not  only  introduced 
this  pernicious  pradice ;  but  they  have  de¬ 
feated  the  effed  of  an  eftablidiment,  which 
would  have  preferved  us  from  all  the  dangers 
attending  it. — The  greateft  fufferers  by  this 
pradice  will  in  the  end  be  the  moneyed  peo¬ 
ple  themfelves ;  or  thofe  creditors  of  the 
public,  who  are  now  maintained  by  the  con¬ 
tributions  of  the  poor,  and  the  labour  of  the 
induftrious. — It  is  impoffible  that  debts  al¬ 
ways  increafing,  fliould  not  in  time  fink  the 
kingdom.  They  have  already  done  us  un- 
fpeakable  mifchief.  A  conliderable  part  of 
our  people  is  loft.  By  extending  the  influence 
of  the  crown,  they  have  undermined  the 
foundation  of  our  liberties.  It  is  doubtful  alfo, 
whether  they  have  not  turned  the  balance  of 
trade  againft  us,  by  railing  the  price  of  our 
manufadures,  and  carrying  out  of  the  king¬ 
dom  about  a  million  and  a  half  every  year,  in 
payments  of  dividends  to  foreigners.  The  late 
augm.entation  of  the  navy,  though  probably 
a  right  meafure,  has,  by  taking  a  large  an¬ 
nual  fum  from  the  Sinking  Fund,  removed 
us  to  a  greater  diftance  than  ever  from  the 
pofftbility  of  difcharging  them.  An  unfa¬ 
vourable  turn  of  events  in  the  Raji-lndies, 

(a)  I  have  related  this  fa£t  from  the  moll  refpeflable 
authority. 


or 


vmju 


am 


(  vi  ) 

or  any  confiderable  deficiencies  in  tHe  res. 
venue,  .might  deftroy  our  ability  of  paying' 
even  the  intereft  of  them.  At  leafty  it  is  to 
be  feared,  that  another  war  would  exhauft 
our  refources,  and  bring  our  affairs  to  a  crifis. 

In  thefe  circumftances  ;  fome  vigorous 
meafures  for  our  own  prefervation,  ought  to 
be  entered  into  imipediately.  More  efpe- 
cially,  it  feems  to  be  time  for  the  public 
creditors  to  think  of  fecuring  their  capital. 
The  law  once  gave  them  the  Sinking  Fund 
as  a  lacred  and  unalienable  fecurity.  Would 
it  be  wrong  to  require  a  rejiitution  of  it  j  and 
to  make  this  a  condition  of  future  loans  ? 

Upon  the  whole.  It  is  my  fincere  con- 
vidlion,  that  a  policy,  too  narrow  and  felfifh, 
has  brought  us  into  threatning  circumftances. 
I  have  written  under  this  convidtion  •,  and,  if 
my  feelings  have  drawn  from  me  any  language 
improperly  fevere,  I  hope  I  fliall  be  excufed. 

I  will  only  add,  that  I  think  myfelf  much 
obliged  to  the  civility  of  fome  who  have 
addreffed  remarks  to  me.  But  their  objec¬ 
tions  have  not  yet  led  me  to  any  change  of 
fentiments. — Whenever  I  am  made  fenfible 
of  having  fallen  into  any  material  miftakes, 

I  fliall  think  myfelf  bound  to  acknowledffe 
and  retradt  them.  In  the  mean  time,  I  muft 
beg  leave  to  avoid  difputes  ;  and  to  refer  in 
lilence  all  I  have  written  to  the  decifion  of 
the  public. 


▲ 


CON- 


CONTENTS. 


PART  I. 

Containing  an  Account  of  Nature  and 
Powers  of  Sinking  Fund;  and  the 
fatal  Confequences  of  alienating  it.  Page  i 

PART  II. 

Containing  the  History  of  the  Sinking 
Fund;  and  an  Account  of  the  Dangers  at¬ 
tending  the  National  Debt.  p.  21 


APPENDIX, 

Containing  explanatory  Observations,  and 
Tables,  and  an  Account  of  the  prefent 
State  of  Population  in  Norfolk,  a?id 
fame  of  the  adjoining  Counties.  —  p.  5^ 

J  V 


•  ':-r’  V  V  V  V*  V  V'  V‘  V”  V'  V' V' V'  V' V'  V'  *'^^-'^ 

••'  '*•  ••'  j-*'  '••••■  ''v*'  '*•..••*  *'•..••■  v*  \  ..•■  \y*Xy*\x'\y*\^.>'\  y\y-\  "Si* 


*S-  •••  •••  •••  •••  Z*^  *M  .•«  **  >  ♦  •  V  •  V  V  •  •  %  *•  •*  •• 

__•*  V*  v/X-*  V'  '*■  •■  ’••••*  "v  \  .•*••  .*••.  *?2* 


A  N 


A  P  P  E  A 


T  O 


THE  PUBLIC 


5 


On  the  Subject  of  the 


NATIONAL  DEBT. 


PART  I. 

IN  a  late  Treatife  on  Reverfionary  Payments, 
Annuity- Schemes,  and  Population,  I  have 
offered  to  the  public  feveral  obfervations 
on  a  fubjedl,  now  highly  interefting  to  this 
kingdom  :  I  mean,  the  National  Debt. 
Thefe  obfervations  appeared  to  me  impor¬ 
tant  ;  and  in  this  opinion  of  them  I  have 
been  fince  confirmed  by  the  concurring 
opinions  of  fome  of  the  befl  judges.  But 
they  have  not  yet,  as  far  as  I  know,  been 
favoured  with  the  attention  of  the  managers 

B  "  of 


(  2  )  . 

ol  our  affairs ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  reafons 
of  the  prefent  Appeal  to  the  Public.  Could 
our  Governors  be  engaged  to  take  them  into 
confideration,  they  would  perhaps  fee  them 
to  be  worth  their  regard.  Be  this,  however, 
as  it  will,  I  cannot  make  myfelf  eafy,  with¬ 
out  begging  from  the  Public  one  further 
hearing  on  this  fubjedl. 

I  have  obferved,  in  page  163  of  the 
Treatife  I  have  mentioned,  that  in  order  to 
juflify  the  Alienation  of  the  Sinking  Fund, 
it  has  been  ufual  to  plead,  that  when  money 
is  wanted,  it  makes,  no  difference,  whether 
it  is  taken  from  hence,  or  procured  by  mak¬ 
ing  a  new  loan  charged  on  new  funds.  I 
have  called  this  a  Sophism  j  and  afferted  in 
oppofition  to  it,  that  the  difference  between 
thefe  two  ways  of  procuring  money  is  no  lefs 
than  infinite.  Thofe  who  have  entered  into 
my  ideas  cannot  poffibly  want  any  other 
proof  of  this  affertion  than  I  have  given.  But, 
as  it  is  a  point  of  particular  confequence,  and 
fome  have  objeded  to  it,  I  fliall  hei-e  give  as 
diflind  and  clear  an  explanation  of  it  as  I  can. 

A  Sinking  Fund,  according  to,  the  mod 
general  idea  of  it,  fignifies  .“  any  Saving  or' 
Surplus,  fet  apart  from  the  red  of  an  an¬ 
nual  income,  and  appropriated  to  thepurpofe 
of  paying  off  er  linking  debts.” 

Tliere  are  three  'ways  in  which  a  kingdom 
may  apjily  fuch  a  laving. 

5  - 


(  3  ) 

\Jl.  The  mterejis  difengaged  from  time  to 
time  by  the  payments  made  with  it,  may  be 
themfelves  applied  to  the  payment  of  the 
public  debts. 

Or,  2dly,  They  may  be  fpent  on  current 
fervices. 

Or,  They  may  be  immediately  an¬ 

nihilated  by  abolifhing  the  taxes  charged 
with  them. 

In  the  firft  way  of  employing  a  Sinking 
Fund,  it  becomes  a  fund  always  increaling 
itfelf.  Every  new  interejl  difengaged  by  it, 
containing'  the  fame  powers  with  it,  and 
joining  its'  operation  to  it ; .  and  the  fame 
being  true  of  every  i'ntereft  difengaged  by 
every  intereft,  it  muft  aft,  not  merely  with 
an  increajing  force,  but  with  a  force  the 
increafe  of  which  is  continually  accelerated  j 
and  which,  therefore,  however  fmall  at 
firft,'  muft  in  time  become  equal  to  any 

effeft.- - In  the  fecond  way  of  applying 

a  Sinking  Fund,  it  admits  of  no  increafe,  and 

muft  aft  for  ever  with  the  fame  force. - In 

•  other  words.  A  Sinking  Fund,  according  to 
the  firft  method  of  applying  it,  is,  if  I  may 
be  allowed  the  comparifon,  like  a  grain  of 
corn  fown,  which,  by  having  its  produce 
fown  and  the  produce  of  that  produce  and  fo 
on,  is  capable  of  an  increafe  that  will  foon 

ftock  a  province  or  fupport  a  kingdom. - 

On  the  contrary.  A  Sinking  Fund,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  fecond  way  of  applying  it,  is  like 
a  feed  the  produce  of  which  is  confumed ; 

B  2  and 


•■A. 


lit- 


V' t  .  '^-r.  •  « 


(  4  ) 


and  which,  therefore,  can  be  of  no  farther 
ule,  and  has  all  .its  powers  deftroyed. 

The  former,  be  its  income  at  Hrft  ever  fo 
much  exceeded  by  the  new  debts  incurred 
annually,  will  foon  become  fuperior  to  them, 
and  cancel  them - The  latter,  if  at  firft 


inferior  to  the  new  debts  incurred  annually, 
will  for  ever  remain  fo ;  and  a  ftate  that  has 
no  other  provifion  for  the  payment  of  its 
debts,  will  be  always  accumulating  them  till 
it  links. 

What  has  been  now  faid  of  the  fecond 
mode  of  applying  a  fund  is  true  in  a  higher 
degree  of  the  third.  For  in  this  cafe,  the 
difengaged-  interefts,  inftead  of  being  either 
added  to  the  fund,  or  fpent  from  year  to  year 
on  ufeful  fervices,  are  immediately  given 
up. 

In  Ihort.  A  fund  of  the  JirJl  fort  is  money 
bearing  compound  intereft - A  fund  of  the 


J'econd  lort  is  money  bearing  Jimple  intereft 
And  a  fund  of  the  third  fort  is  money 

- The  difference  be- 


bearing  no  intereft 


tween  them  is,  therefore,  properly  infinite : 
And  this  is  lb  evident,  that  I  cannot  go  on 
with  this  explanation  without  fome  reluc¬ 
tance.  I  will,  however,  rely  on  the  candour 
of  thofe  who  muft  be  already  abundantly 
convinced,  while  I  endeavour  to  illuftrate  thefe 
obfervations  by  the  following  example. 


Let  us  fuppofe  a  nation  to  he  capable  of 
fetting  apart  the  annual  fum  of  200,000 1. 


as 


r, .  \ 


7. 


K‘i 


(  5  ) 

as  a  fund  for  keeping  the  debts  it  is  con¬ 
tinually  incurring  in  a  courfe  of  redemption; 
and  let  us  confider  what  its  operation  will 
be,  in  the  three  ways  of  applying  it  which 
I  have  defcribed,  fuppofing  the  public  debts 
to  bear  an  interefl;  of  5  per  cent,  and  the 
period  of  operation  86  years. 

A  debt  of  200,000  /.  difcharged  the  firft 
year,  will  difengage  for  the  public  an  an¬ 
nuity  of  10,000/.  If  this  annuity,  inftead 
of  being  fpent.on  current  fervices,  is  added 
to  the  fund,  and  both  employed  in  paying 
debts,  an  annuity  of  10,500/.  will  be  difen - 
gaged  th.Q  fecond  year,  or  of  20,500/.  in  both 
years.  And  this  again,  added  to  the  fund 
the  third  year,  will  increafe  it  to  220,500/; 
with  which  an  annuity  will  be  then  difen- 
gaged  of  11,025/;  and  the  fum  oi  the  difen - 
gaged  annuities  will  be  31,525/.*  which, 
added  to  the  fund  the  fourth  year,  will  in¬ 
creafe  it  to  231,525/.  and  enable  it  then  to 
difengage  an  annuity  of  11,576/.  5  r.  and 
render  the  fum  of  the  difengaged  annuities, 
in  four  years,  43,101/.  5^. — ^ — Let  any  one 
proceed  in  this  way,  and  he  may  fatisfy  him- 
felf,  that  the  original  Fund,  together  with  the 
fum  of  the  annuities  difengaged,  will  increafe 
fafter  and  fafler  every  year,  till,  in  86  years, 
the  fund  becomes  13,283,414/,  and  theyaw 
of  the  difengaged  annuities  13,083,414/.  {a) 
—  The  full  value,  therefore,  at  5  per  cent. 

(a)  See  Appendix,  note  A,  Table  I. 

of 


% 


i 


(  6  ) 

of  an  annuity  of  13,083,414/.  will  have 
been  paid  in  86  years ;  that  is,  very  nearly, 
262  millions  of  debt :  And,  confequently,  it 
appears,  that  tho’  the  ftate  had  been  all  along 
adding  every  year  to  its  debts  three  millions; 
that  is,  tho’  in  the  time  fuppofed  it  had  con- 
trafted  a  debt  of  258  millions,  it  would  have 
been  more  than  difeharged,  at  no  greater  ex¬ 
pence  than  an  annual  faving  of  200,000/.-: _ 

But-if  the  fame  fund  had  been  employed  in 
thcjecom^  of  the  three  ways  I  have  c  eferibed, 
the  annuity  difengaged  by  it  would  have  been 
every  year  1 0,000/;  and  the  fum  of  the  an¬ 
nuities  dilengaged  would  have  been  86  times 

10,000/,  or  860,000/; - The  difeharged 

debt,  therefore,  would  have  been  no  more 
than  the  value  of  fuch  an  annuity,  or 
i7>2co,ooo/.  But  belides  this,  it  mult 
be  confidered,  that  there  will  be  an  expence 
fa^edy  in  confequence  of  applying  every  year 
the  difengaged  annuities  to  current  fer vices, 
for  which  otherwife  equivalent  lums  muft 
have  been  provided  by  new  taxes  or  aiTell- 
ments.  10,000/,  will  be  laved  at  the  begin- 
ning  oi  tht  fecond  yezvy  20,000/.  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  third-,  30,000/.  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  fourth  and  8 50,000  /.  at  the 
beginning  of  the  86th  year  {a)-,  and  the  funi  ‘ 
of  all  thefe  favings  is  36,550,000/.  which, 

(a)  THis  is  an  Arithmetical  Progreffion  ;  and  the  fum 
of  every  fuch  progreffion  is  found  by  multiplying  the 
fum  of  the  firft  and  Jaft  terms  by  half\\\c  number  of  terms ; 
or,  in  the  prefeiit  cafe,  by  ntultiplying  86q,ooo  by  ^2^. 

added 


/ 


(  7  ) 

■added  to  17,200,000/.  the  debt  dijcharged, 
makes  53,750,000/.  Subftra(fl  the  laft  I'um 
from  262  millions,  and  208,250,000/.  will  be 
■  the  complete  lofs  of  the  public  arifing,  in  86 
years,  from  employing  an  annual  fum  of 
200,000/.  in  the  fecond  way  rather  than  the 
£rft. 

Little  need  be  faid  of  the  effeil  of  the  fame 
fund  applied  in  the  third  way.  It  is  obvious 
that  the  whole  advantage  derived  from  it, 
would  be  the  difcharge  of  a  debt  of  200,000/. 
annually  •,  or  of  17,200,000/.  in  all. 

Similar  deductions  might  be  made  on  the 
fuppofition  of  low'er  rates  of  intereft  and 

fhorter  periods. - Thus  j  let  a  date  be  fup- 

pofed  to  run  in  debt  two  millions  annually, 
for  which  it  pays  4  per  cent,  intereft.  In  70 
years,  a  debt  of  140  millions  would  be  in¬ 
curred.  But  an’ appropriation  of  400,000/. 
perann.,  if  employed  in  the  firji  way,  would, 
at  the  end  of  this  term,  leave  the  nation  be¬ 
forehand,  fix  millions ;  whereas,  if  applied 
•in  the  fecond  way,  the  nation  would  be  left 
in  debt,  73  millions ;  and  in  the  third  way, 
112  millions. 

It  is  an  obfervation  of  particular  importance 
here,  that  there  can  be  no  reafon  for  em¬ 
ploying  a  fund  in  the  fecond  of  the  ways  I 
have  mentioned,  rather  than  the  firf.  In 
both  cafes,  the  taxes  are  continued  durin 
the  operation  of  the  fund.  In  the  former, 

difengaged  tax  or  annuity  is  employed  to  pay 

debts ; 


/ 


p  Ctq 


t 


(  8  ) 

debts ;  and  in  the  latter,  it  is  employed  to 
jQve  debts  which  muft  have  been  otherwife 
incurred.  If  employed  to  debts  it  will 
obtain  for  the  public  other  annuities,  and 
thofe  others  m  infinitum.  But  if  it  is  em¬ 
ployed  to  debts  j  or,  which  in  the  pre- 
fent  cafe  is  the  fame,  the  tnterefis  of  debts, 
as  thofe  interefls  would  not  themfelves' 
have  borne  intereft,  no  farther  profit  could 

arife - In  fhort,  in  the  one  cafe  the  difen- 

pged  annuity  is  prolific,  and  contains  in 
itfelf  a  number  continually  growing  of  other 
annuities - In  the  other  cafe,  it  is  a  bar¬ 
ren  annuity. - To  employ  a  fund,  there¬ 

fore,  in  the  latter  way  rather  than  the  former, 
is  preferring  an  exemption  from  the  burden 
of  ONE  annuity,  to  an  exemption  from 
MANY;  and  fubjecling  a  kingdom  to  the 
lofs  of  208  millions  in  the  firfi  example,  and 
79  millions  in  the  fecond,  only  for  the  fake 
of  avoiding  one  expence  by  continuing  an¬ 
other  equal  expence. 

In  the  third  or  laft  way  of  employing  a 
Fund,  the  Public  will  obtain  fome  advan¬ 
tage  by  the  abolition  of  taxes.  But  it  is  an 
advantage  unfpeakably  overbalanced  by  dif- 
advantages.— — In  the  firfi  example,  we 
have  feen,  that  it  is  gaining  36  millions  and 
a  half  at  the  expence  of  262  millions;  or, 
in  other  words,  procuring  an  eafe  from 
taxes  which,  in  86  years,  .  vvould  have 
been  increafed  to  ^ ^0,000 L  per  annum,  at  the 
expence  of  a  Fund  that,  in  the  fame  time, 

would 


(  9  ) 

wduld  have  eafed  the  Public  of  above  thir¬ 
teen  MILLIONS  per  annum  in  taxes. — But 
I  need  not  infift  on  the  folly  of  this,  the. 
abolition  of  taxes  being,  what  we  have  hi¬ 
therto  known  little  of  in  this  country. 

It  muft  have  been  obferved,  that  a  Fund 
of  the  fecond  fort  is  a  greater  cheek  on  the 
increafe  of  public  debts,  than  a  Fund  of  the 
third  fort.  But  the  difference  is  not  con- 
liderable,  and  there  is  one  circumftance 
which,  I  think,  reduces  it  alnioft  to  nothing. 
—It  fuppofes  a  flridt  and  inviolable  appli¬ 
cation  of  the  perpetuated  annuities  to  the 
purpofe  of  faving  equivalent  debts.  But 
fuch  an  application  of  them  is  fcarcely  prac¬ 
ticable.  When  fmall,  they  would  be  neg¬ 
lected  ;  and,  when  large,  they  would,  like 
the  favings  of  perfons  in  private  life,  only 
occafion  an  abatement  of  frugality  :  and, 
for  this  reafon,  if  a  Fund  is  not  applied  in 
the  firft  way,  it  might,  for  ought  I  know, 
be  belt  that  it  fhould  be  employed  in  the 
laft  way  ;  for  a  kingdom  would  then  be  fure 
of  receiving  fame  relief,  whereas  otherwife 
it  might  receive  none. 

Perhaps,  indeed,  one  might  obferve,  in 
general,  that  if  a  Sinkmg  Fund  is  not  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  firlt  way,  and  rendered  abfo- 
lutely  inacceffible  and  unalienable,  it  would 
be  moft  for  the  beneht  of  a  State  to  be  with¬ 
out  any  fuch  provilion.  For,  in  thefe  circum- 
Itances,  tho’  incapable  of  doing  much  good, 
it  might  do  much  harm  by  encouraging  ex- 

C  travagance. 


(  10  ) 

travagance,  and  fupplying  Miniilers  of  State 
with  more  m6ney  to  be  fpent  in  maintaining 
undue  influence  and  corruption. 

But  it  is  time  to  enter  into  a  more  ex¬ 
plicit  confutation  of  the  plea  commonly  ufed 
to  juftify  the  alienation  of  the  Sinking  Fundi 
and  which  has  been  mentioned  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  this  Eflay. 

This  alienation,  it  is  well  known,  is  be¬ 
come  a -fixed  meafure  of  Government  among 
us.  We  owe  to  it  our  prefent  heavy  debt, 
and  if  continued  much  longer,  there  will,  I 
am  afraid,  be  no  poflibility  of  efcaping  fome 
of  the  worfl;  calamities.  It  is,  therefore, 
neceflary  that  the  reafon  on  which  it  has 
been  grounded,  fliould  be  particularly  ex¬ 
amined  and  refuted.  And  in  order  to  do 
this,  I  mufl;  beg  leave  to  bring  again  to  view 
fome  of  the  preceding  obfervations. 

There  is,  let  us  fuppofe,  a  million  wanted 
for  the  neceflary  fupplies  of  the  year.  It 
lies  ready  in  the  Sinking  Fund,  and  a  mini- 
fler,  in  order  to  obtain  leave  to  feize  it, 
pieads,  “  That,  fince  fuch  a'fum  muft  be 
“  had,  it  is  indifferent  whether  it  is  taken 
“  from  hence,  or  procured  by  making  a 
“  new  loan.-  If  the  former  is  done,  an  old 
“  debt  will  be  continued.  If  the  latter  is 

done,  an  equal  new  debt  will  be  incurred, 
“  which  would  have- been  otherwife  faved  ; 
“  and  he  public  interell:  can  be  no  more 
“  affeded  by  one  of  thefe  than  the  other. 

A.  “  Bat 


(  ^  I  ) 

“  But  the  former  is  eafieft.  And  it  will 
“  fave  the  difagreeable  necedity  of  laying 
“  on  a  new  tax.” — This  argument  appears 
plaufible ;  and  it  has  never  yet  ■  failed  of- 
fuccefs. — But  what  muft  prove  the  confe- 
quence  ?  —  If  fuch  reafoning  is  good  one 
year,  it  is  good  every  year ;  and  warrants  a 
total  alienation  of  the  Sinking  Fund,  if  the 
annual  expences  of  Government  are  fuch  as 
always  to  require  a  fum  equal  to  its  income. 
And.  thus,  it  will  lofe  its  whole  efficacy ; 
and  a  Fund  that,  if  not  alienated,  would 
have  been  omnipotent,  will  be  converted 
into  juft  fuch  a  feeble  and  barren  one,  as 
the  fecond  or  third  in  the  former  account. 

,  The  fallacioufnefs  of  this  argument  con- 
lifts  in  the  fuppolition,  that  no  iofs  can  arife 
to  the  Public  from  continuing  an  old  debt, 
when  it  cannot  be  difeharged  without  in¬ 
curring  an  equal  new  debt.—l  have  demon- 
flrated  this  to  be  a  miflake  ;  and  that  by 
prailifing  upon  it,  or  alienating  rather  than 
borrowmg,  an  infinite  lofs  may  be  fuf- 

tained. - Agreeably  to  this,  I  have  in  the 

Treatifeon  Annuities,  pag.  339.  ffiewn,  that 
had  but  400,000/.  fer  annum  of  the  Sinking 
Fund  been  applied,  from  the  year  1716,  in¬ 
violably,  THREE  MILLIONS  per  a7muni  of  our 
taxes  might  now  have  been  annihilated. 

I  will  here  add,  that  had  the  whole  pro¬ 
duce  of  it  been  thus  employed  faj,  we 

(a)  An  explanation  and  proof  of  this  may  be  found 
in  the  Appendix,  Note  B. 

C  2  might 


(  12  ) 

might  now  have  been  in  polTeffion  of  a  very 
conliderable  surplus,  inftead  of  being  in 

debt,  A  HUNDRED  AND  FORTY  MILLIONS. 

— ‘But  I  will  go  farther. -r- Had  even  the 
money  that,  at  different  times,  has  been 
employed  in  paying  off  our  debtsj  been  ap¬ 
plied  but  in  a  different  manner  (b)  that  is, 
had  it  been  made  the  produce  of  a  Sinking 
Fund,  which,  from  1716  to  the  prefent. 
year,  had  never  been  alienated  ;  above 
HALF  our  prefent  debts  would  have  been 
cancelled. — Such  is  the  importance  of  mere¬ 
ly  the  MANNER  of  applying  money. —  Such 
is  the  prodigious  difference,  in  the  prefent 
cafe,  between  borrowing  and  alienating.-^ 
Nor  is  there  any  thing  in  this  myflerious. 
The  reafon  has  been  fufficiently  explained. 
— When  a  ftate  borrows,  it  pays,  I  have 
laid,  only  Jitnple  jntereft  for  money.  When 
it  alienates  a  Fund  appropriated  to  the 
payment  of  its  debts,  it  lofes  the  advantage 
pf  money,  that  would  have  been  otherwife 
improved  neceffarily  at  compound  intereft  (c). 

{h)  \  reckon  that  about  20  millions  of  the  income  of 
the  Sinking  Fund  have,  at  different  times  and  in  different 
ways,  been  employed  in  paying  public  debts.  Fifty-fix 
yearly  payments  pf  357,006/.  make  nearly  this  fum ; 
and,  had  it  been  divided  into  fuch  payments  and  inviol¬ 
ably  applied  in  the  manner  I  have  explained,  from  the 
vear  1716;  Seventy-cne  Millions  of  debt,  bearing 
4  per  cent,  interclf,  would  now  have  been  difeharged. — . 
I  hope  it  will  be  remembered,  that  in  mentioning  the 
refults  of  calculations  of  this  kind,  I  generally  give  the 
iiearefl  round  numbers,  my  defign  not  requiring  greater 
exac^dnels. 

(c)  I  muff  beg  the  reader,  if  he  has  here  any  doubt, 
to  coiuult  Note  C,  in  the  Appendix. 

And 


(  13  ) 

And  can  there  be  any  circumftances  of  a 
State  which  can  render  the  latter  of  thefc 
preferable  to  the  former?  Or  can  the  incon¬ 
veniences,  which  may  attend  the  impofition 
of  a  new  tax,  deferve  in  this  cafe  to  be  men¬ 
tioned  ?  What  a  barbarous  policy  is  that 
which  runs  a  Kingdom  in  debt.  Millions, 
in  order  to  fave  Thousands  ;  which  robs 
the  Public  of  the  power  of  annihilating  all 
taxes,  in  order  to  avoid  a  fmall  prefent  in- 
creafe  of  taxes  ? — This,  in  truth,  has  been  . 
our  policy;  and  it  would  be  affronting  com¬ 
mon  fenfe  to  attempt  a  vindication  of  it. 

I  confefs  myfelf  incapable  of  fpeaking  on 
this  fubjedl  with  calmnefs. — Let  the  Reader 
think  of  the  fads  I  have  mentioned  :  let 
him  confider  the  difference  in  our  favour, 
which  an  inviolable  application  of  the  Sink¬ 
ing  Fund  would  have  made :  Let  him  com¬ 
pare  what,  in  that  cafe,  we  Jhould  have  been, 
with  what  we  are ;  and  let  him,  if  he  can, 
be  unmoved. 

I  have,  hitherto,  argued  on  the  fuppo-: 
fition  of  a  total  ot  conjtant  alienation'  of  the 
Sinking  Fund.  It  may  be  proper  juft  <o 
mention  the  effedt  of  a  partial  alienation 

of  it.  ,  .  j  • 

Let  us  then  fuppofe,  that  its  produce  is 

taken  from  it  only  every  other  year.  Moft 
perfons  will,  perhaps,  be  ready  to  pronounce, 
that  this  could  only  take  from  it,  in  any 
given  time,  half  its  effedl.  But  the  truth 

IS » 


(  H  ) 

is,  that  fuch  an  interruption  might  deftroy 

almoft  its  whole  efFedl. - An  annual  Fund 

of  200,000/.  would  (it  has  been,fliewn)  in 
eighty-fix  years,  pay  off  262  millions,  bear¬ 
ing  intereft  at  5  per  cent.  But  if  its  pro¬ 
duce  is  taken  from  it  every  other  year,  it 
would,  in  the  fame  time,  pay  off  no  more 
than  twenty-eight  millions. 

In  like  manner;  a  Fund  of  a  million  per 
annuniy  which  commenced  at  the  time  of 
the  eflablifhment  of  our  Sinking  Fund,  would 
by  this  time,  (that  is,  in  fifty-lix  years)  have 
paid  off  Two  HUNDRED  MILLIONS  bearing 
interefi:  at  4  per  cent.  But  if  alienated  every 
other  year,  it  could  not  have  paid  off  above 
FIFTY  MILLIONS,  (a)  And,  if  alienated 
two  years  in  every  three,  it  could  not  have 
paid  off  TWENTY-SEVEN  MILLIONS. 

I  mean  this  on  the  fuppofition  of  a  faith¬ 
ful  application  of  its  whole  growing  produce, 
in  the  years  when  it  is  not  alienated.  But 
this  is  a  fuppofition  which,  when  applied  to 
the  management  of  our  Sinking  Fund,  is 
much  too  favourable.  It  has  feldom  hap¬ 
pened  that,  in  any  one  year,  its  whole  pro- 
dijce  has  been  applied  to  its  proper  ufe.  In 
mofl  years,  it  has  been  wholly  alienated; 
and  in  fome  years,  anticipated  and  mort¬ 
gaged. — Can  we  then  w'onder,  that  it  has 
done  us  fo  little  fervice  ^ 

(aj  See  the  Appendix.  Note  D. 


F  rom 


(  i5  ) 

^  * 

From  thefe  obfervations  the  truth  of  th^ 

following  alTertion  will  be  very  evident. 

“  A  State  may,  without  difficulty,  redeem 
“  all  its  debts  by  borrowing  money  for  that 
purpofe,  at  an  equal  or  even  any  higher 
“  intereft  than  the  debts  bear ;  and  with- 
out  providing  any  other  Funds  than  fuch 
“  fmall  ones,  as  ffiall  from  year  to  year  be- 
come  neceffary  to  pay  the  intereft  of  the 
fums  borrowed.” 

For  Example.  Suppofe  our  Parliament^ 
56  years  ago,  had  refolved  to  borrow  half  a 
million  annually  for  the  purpofe  of  redeem¬ 
ing  the  debts  of  the  kingdom.  The  N^a- 
tional  Gairii  fuppoling  the  money  applied, 
without  interruption,  to  the  redemption  of 
debts  bearing  4  per  cent,  intereft,  would 
have  been  a  hundred  millions,  being 
debt  redeemed,  or  the  fum  nearly  to  which 
an  annuity  of  half  a  million  will  accumulate, 
in  56  years.— ‘-"^On  the  other  hand*  The 
Nationa  I  Lofs  would  have  been,  twenty- 
eight  MILLIONS  -y  being  debt  inciirredy  or 
the  fum  of  all  the  loans. — -^The  ba¬ 
lance,  therefore,  in  favour  of  the  nation, 
would  have  been'(^)  seventy-two  mil- 

LIONSs 

It  Teems  to  me  fcarcely  proper  to  take  into  this  ac¬ 
count,  the  produce  of  the  taxes  laid  to  pay  the  intereft  of 
the  debts  contradled  from  year  to  year.  Let  this,  how¬ 
ever,  be  charo-ed. - The  produce  of  the  taxes  laid  to 

pay  the  intereft  of  the  firft  half  million,  will  be  55  times 
^  20,000 /, 


‘  I! 


(  i6  ) 

LIONS. - -During  this  whole  period,  the 

revenue  account  would  have  been  the  fame 
that  it  has  been,  except  that  it  would  have 
been  charged,  towards  paying  the  interelh 
of  the  money  borrowed,  with  an  annuity 
increallng  at  the  rate  of  20,000/.  every 
year.  In  the  prefent  year,  therefore,  this 
annuity  would  have  been  55  times  20,000/, 
or  1,100,000/.  But  it  lliould  be  remem¬ 
bered,  that  100  millions  having  been  re¬ 
deemed,  the  kingdom  might  have  been 
now  eafed  of  the  annual  expence  of four  mil¬ 
lions. 

Again.  Suppofe  only  half  a  million  an¬ 
nually  to  be  now  capable  of  being  fpared 
from  the  Sinking  Fund.  This,  if  applied  to 
the  redemption  of  the  3  per  cents,  at  par, 
would  pay  olf  no  more  than  61  millions  in  52 
years.  But  let  half  a  million  be  borrowed 
annually,  for  only  23  years  to  come  j  and 
99  millmis  will  be  redeemed  in  the  fame 
time,  (a)  That  is;  38  millions  more  than 

could 

20,000/,  or  1,100,000/.  For  the  fecond,  third,  fourth, 
&c.  half-millions,  the  payment  of  taxes  will  be  54, 
53,  52,  &c.  times  20,000/.  And  the  fiirn  of  all  thefe 
payments  will  be  30,800,000/.  Add  this  fum  to  28 
millions;  and  58,800,0000/.  will  be  the  whole  national 
hjs :  which  dedu61cd  from  99,902,770  (the  exa5i  na^ 
tional gain)  leaves  41,102,770.'^.  the  balance  in  favour  of 
the  public.  See  the  Appendix,  Note  C. 

(a)  Such  a  feheme  as  is  here  propofed  might  be  more 
helped  than  can  well  be  imagined  by  various  kinds  of  ma^ 
nagement  ;  and,  particularly,  when  the  Jiock^  are  under 
by  purchafing  them  for  the  public  at  the  prizes  in 

the 


(  17  ) 

could  have  been  othervvife  redeemed,  at  the 
extraordinary  expence  of  only  eleven  millions 
iind  a  half. 

War,  while  fuch  a  fcheme  was  going  on, 
would  ihcreafe  its  efficiency  ^  and  any  fuf- 
penfion  of  it  then,  would  be  the  madnefs  of 
giving  it  a  mortal  ftab,  at  the  very  time  it  was 
making  the  quickeft  progrefs  towards  the 
accomplifhment  of  its  end. — — Suppofe,  for 
inflance,  that,  within  the  period  I  have 
mentioned,  two  wars  ffiould  happen  ^  one  to 
begin  five  years  hence,  and  to  laft  io  years  ; 
the  other  to  begin  35  years  hence,  and  to  lad 
alfo  10  years,  and  both  raifing  the  iriterefi: 
of  money  in  the  Funds  (^)  to  4!  per  cciit. 
It  may  be  eafily  calculated,  that  on  thefe 
fuppofitions  145  millions^  inllead  of  99  mil¬ 
lions,  would  be  paid  off  by  fuch  a  fcherne. 
But,  ffiould  it  be  fufpended  during  the  con¬ 
tinuance  of  the  two  wars,  it  would  in  the 
fame  time  (that  is,  in  52  years)  pay  off  no 
more  than  40  millions. 

.  I  know  thele  Obfervations  will  look  more 
like  vijions  than  reahtiesy  to  thofe  \yho  have 
never  turned  their  thoughts  to  thefe  fubjedts ; 


the  Alley. - There  are  no  fums  fo  trifling,  as  not  to  be 

capable  in  this  way,  of  being  applied  to  the  payinent  of  the 

public  debts. - The  fmalleji  gleanings  of  a  fund  might 

be  thus  improved,  in  a  better  manner  than  any  other 
parts  of  it. 

,  fZ>>That  is  ;  fo  high  as  that  it  fliall  be  an  advantage 
to  the  Proprietors  of  the  3  cents^  to  difpofe  of  them  at, 
about  67. 

}  I  • 


D 


or 


f 


(  18  ) 

bf  who. have  not  duly  attended  to  the  amaz¬ 
ing  increafe  of  moneys  bearing  compound 
intereft.-^= — The  duration  of  the  lives  of 
individuitls  is  confined  within  limits  fo  narrow^ 
as  not  to  admitj  in  any  great  degree^  of  the 
advantages  that  may  be  derived  from  this  in¬ 
creafe.  But  a  period  of  50  of  60  or  loo  years 
being  little  in  the  duration  of  kingdoms,  they 
are  capable  of  fecuring  them  in  almofl  any 
degree  i  And  if  no  kingdoms  fhould  ever  do 
this  ;  if,  in  particular,  a  nation  in  fuch  cir- 
cumfiances  as  burs,  fhould  continue  to  neg- 
ledl  availing  itfelf  of  them  :  one  fadt  will 
be  added  to  the  many  in  the  political  worlds 
■which,  tho’  they  cannot  Jurprize  a  philofb- 
phical  perfon,  he  inufi;  confider  with  concern 
and  regret. 


Money  bearing  compound  intefeft  in-^ 
creafes  at  firfi:  flov/ly,  But,  the  fate  of  in¬ 
creafe  being  continually  accelerated,  it  be¬ 
comes  in  fonie  time  fo  rapid,  as  to  mock  all 

the  powers  of  the  imagination. - One 

PENNY,  put  out  at  our  Saviour’s  birth  to  5 
per  cent,  compound  interefi:,  would,  before 
this  time,  have  increafed  to  a  greater  fum, 
than  would  be  contained  in  a  hundred  and 
Fifty  millions  of  earths,  all  folid 

gold  (c).— - Bat  if  put  out  to  Jhiiple  interefi:, 

it  would,  in  the  fame  time,  have  amounted 

(c)  See  Treatife  on  Reverllonary  Payments,  &c.  Intro* * 
dudtion,  page  J3. 

tD 


1  .  •  t 


i 

i,- 

*  's, 


(  >9  ) 

to  no  ttiore'tjian  feve7i  Jlnliings  and font-  pence 
half-penny goverfinient  has  hitherto 
chofcn  tp  improve  money  in  the  laf,  rather 
than  the  frjl  of  thefe  ways. 

'  *  '  I 

,  .  .. 

,  Many  fchemes  have  at  different  times  been 
pjropofed  for  paying-  off  the  National  Debt. 
But  the  inventors  of  them  might  have  fpared 
their  labour.  Their  fchemes  could  not  de- 
ferve  the  leaft  notice.’  Th.e  beft  I'cheme  has 
been  long  known.  It  has  been  eftablijhed  •, 
but,  unhappily  for  this  kingdom,  it  was 
crufhed  in  its  infancy.  Still,  however,  if 
our  deliverance  is  poffible,  it  muff  be  derived 
from  hence.  The  ftrideff  mathematical 
evidence  proves,  that  the  natures  of  things 
don’t  admit  of  any  method  of  redeeming 

public  debts  fo  expeditious  and  effedtual. - - 

Restore,  then,  ths  Sinking  Fund. 
And  if  the  whole  of  it  cannot  be  unaliena¬ 
bly  applied  to  its  original  ufe,  let  some  part 
of  it  be  fo  applied ;  that  the  nation  may,  at 
leaft,  enjoy  a  chance  of  being  faved. — “  The 
Sinking  Fund,  (fays  a  great  writer)  is  the 
laft  relbrt  of  the  nation  j  its  only  domeftic 
“  refpurce,  on  which  muft  chiefly  depend  all 
**  the  hopes  we  can  entertain  of  ever  dif- 
“  charging  or  moderating  our  incumbrances. 
“  And,  therefore,  the  prudent  application 
“  of  the  large  fums  now  ariling  from  this 
fund,  is  a  point  of  the  utmoft  importance, 
and  well  worthy  the  ferious  attention  of 

P  2  “  Parliament.” 


(  20  ) 

“  Parliament.”(^/) — I  fhould  offer  an  injury, 
to  truth,  were  I  to  fay  no  more,  than  that 
I  have  pointed  out  the  moft  prudent  ap¬ 
plication  of  this  fund.  I  am  perfuaded  that 
I  have  pointed  out  the  only  application  of 
it,  that  can  do  us  any  effential  fervice.'  Time 
mull:  difcover  whether  the  Parliament 
will  think  it  worthy  of  any  attention. 

{d)  See  Mr.  Juftice  Blackstone’s  Commentaries 
'on  the  J^aws  of  England;,  Vol.  I.  page  329. 


PART 


(  21  ) 


PART  II. 


I  Have  frequently  fpoken  on  the  fuppoh- 
tion  that  the  Sinking  Fund,  as  it  was 
originally  eftablifhed  by  the  Legiflature,  was 
fuch  a  fund  as  I  have  explained  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  pages.  The  following  brief  account 
of  the  origin  of  this  Jund,  and  of  the  mea- 
fures  of  Government  with  refpedt  to  it,  will, 
I  think,  prove  this  and  at  the  fame  time, 
perhaps,  convince  every  perfon,  that  this  is 
a  fubjedl  on  which  the  nation  has  indeed  no 
fmall  reafon  for  complaint. 

Before  the  eftablifhment  of  this  fund,  there 
had  exifted  many  fmaller  funds  of  the,  fame 
nature.  That  is  j  fuch  duties  or  taxes  had 
been  provided,  for  paying  the  intereils  of 
particular  loans,  as  afforded  furpluffes  by 
which  the  principal  itfelf  was  to  be  gradually 
redeemed.  This  feems  to  have  been  the  com¬ 
mon  practice  in  the  reigns  of  King  William 
and  Queen  Anne.  MofI;  of  the  public  duties 

were 


I’  ^  I 


(  22  ) 

were  given  for  terms  of  years  j  and  at  the 
end  of  thofe  terms  they  ceafed  of  courfe,  un-. 
lefs  continued  for  farther  terms  by  new  adls 
®f  F nflidniciit ,  And,  in  genera],  it  was  pro¬ 
vided,  when  any  money  was  raifed,  that  the 
principal  fhould  be  cancelled  either  by  ttme^ 
as  in  the  cafe  of  the  fale  of  long  and  fhort 
annuities,  or  by  the  furpluffes  of  the  duties 
charged  with  the  payment  of  the  intereft. 
This  was  certainly  an  excellent  plan.  But 
it  was  by  no  means  carried  fleadily  into  ex¬ 
ecution. - In  the  year  1720,  moil  of  the 

long  and  fliort  annuities  were  converted  into 
redeemable  perpetuities,  at  the  expence  of 
above  three  millions ;  and  the  furpluiTes  of 
the  duties,  charged  with  particular  loans, 
were  often  fo  broke  into,  by  being  either 
charged  with  new  loans  before  they  had  can¬ 
celled  the  old,  or  fpent  on  current  fervices, 
as  to  be  rendered  incapable  of  anfwerinpr  the 
end  intended  by  them  — In  cLfe- 

quence 

Dr.  Davenant,  in  his  ElTayon  the  prohable  Me- 
thod  of  making  People  Gainers  in  the  Balance  of  Trade,  pub- 
Ji(ned  in  1699^  complains  of  this  in  eery  llrong  language 
and  reprefeius  it  as  lull  of'danger  to  the  trade  and  liberties 

cf  the  kingdom.- - “  A  fufficient  provifion  (fays  he)  is 

“  not  made  againft  diverting  the  public  treafure,  and 

“  agairift  breaking  into  appropriated  finds. - The  laws 

“  have  not  made  this  crimiaa]  enough. _ The  Ex¬ 

chequer  fhould  be  fenced  about  with  all  poflibJe  Ikill. 

-Stopping  the  principal,  tho’  the  payments  of  in¬ 
tereft  are  continued,  may  prove  fttal. - More  dan¬ 

ger  may  arile  lo  our  liberties  fronj  breaking  into  old 


t  .  ■  Xv-,- 


(  23  ) 

quence  partly  of  this  bad  management,  our 
debts  at  the  acce{}ion  of  the  prefent  Royal 
Family  were  fo  much  increafed,  as  to  be  ge¬ 
nerally  reckoned  infupportable  •,  and  their  re- 
dud:ion  was  made  one  of  the  firft  objects  of 
parliamentary  attention.  This  gave  rife,  in 
the  year  1716,  to  the  inftitution  of  the  fund 
of  which  1  am  giving  an  account;  t\ve.  father 
of  which,  as  is  well  known,  was  Sir  Robert 

Walpole. - All  the  taxes  charged  with 

the  National  Debt  were  now  made  perpetual, 
and  digefted  into  three  funds  called  the  Ag¬ 
gregate,  the  South-fea  and  the  general  funds. 

_ l-At  the  fame  time  a  confiderable  faving 

was  obtained,  by  the  redudtion  of  interelt 
from  6  to  5  per  cent ;  and  this  faving,  toge¬ 
ther  with  former  favings,  and  all  that  fhould 
afterwards  arife,  were  to  be  colledled  into 
a  fourth  fund,  dillinguifhed  under  the  name 
of  the  Sinking  Fund,  the  account  of  which 
was  to  be  kept  feparate,  and  the  whole  pro¬ 
duce  of  which  was  to  be  appropriated  invio¬ 
lably  to  the  payment  of  the  National  Debt. 

“  funds  appropriated,  than  from  making  new  and  forced 

levies  on  the  fubjea.” - -The  realon  he  gives  for 

thefe  affertions  is,  “  that  in  confequence  of  fuch  dt- 
verfions  of  the  public  fumh  the  public  debts  (then  elh- 
“  mated  bv  him  at  17  millions)  would  increafe,  and 
“  minifters"  come  in  time  to  be  fupplied  with  a  revenue 
“  fo  large  as  would  enable  them,  with  the  help  of  a 
“  ftanding  army,  to  make  Parliaments-  ufelefs  and  to 
“  overthrL  the  conftitution.” - VVhat  would  this  ex- 


cellent  writer  (ay  were  he  now  living  r  bee  Davenant  s 
works  lately  publilhed  by  SirGuARLEs  Whitworth, 
vol.  2d.  page  286,  &c. 


. 

I 

■  ^ » 

I 

.r-_ 

t  • 

if  ,*  1 

1 

"  »* 

'jm-  * 

I  i 


t 


(  24 


N 


A  confiderate  perfon  might  have  fufpeded, 
that  the  fame  caufes  that  had  rendered  for¬ 
mer  partial  appropriations  ineifedtual,  would 
deftroy  the  efficacy  of  this.  There  feemed, 
however,  to  be  reafon  for  hoping  the  con¬ 
trary.  Foi’, 

In  the  firft  place.  The  future  happinefs 
and  glory  of  the  Kingdom  were  conlidered 
as  depending  on  this  appropriation ;  and  the 
law  which  eftabliffied  it  was  declared  to  be 
a  fundamental  law  of  the  realm. 

In  conformity  to  this,  fecondly.  The  words 
of  the  law  were  made  as  ftrong  as  they  could 
well  be  {^).  For,  concerning  all  the  Surpluffes 
to  arife  from  time  to  time  in  the  three  Funds 
I  have  mentioned,  it  declares,  that  they  Jhall 
be  appropriated,  referved  and  employed  to  and 
for  the  difcharge  of  the  principal  and  interejl 
of  fuch  national  debts  and  incumbrances  as 
•were  incurred  before  the  z^th  of  December 
1716,  and  to  and  for  no  other  life,  intent  or 

purpofe  whatever. - It  was,  therefore,  im- 

poffible,  that  any  alienation  of  thefe  Sur¬ 
pluffes  ffiould  take  place,  without  a  diredt 
breach  of  this  law. 

Again.  One  of  the  confiderations,  that 
induced  the  public  creditors  to  accept  of  an 
intereff  of  5  inffead'  of  6  per  cent,  was  the 
fecurity  given  to  their  principal  by  this  ap¬ 
propriation.  It  was  a  facred  Depofit  or 

Tiis  law  was  afterwards  repealed  in  an  adl  of  the 
5th  of  George  1.  chap.  3.  ; 

3  Pledge 


i 


(  25  •  )• 

.pledge  made  over  to  them ;  and  at  that  time 
4t  was,  I  believe,  univerlally  reckoned,  that 
no  alienation  of  it  could  take  place,  wi  th- 
out  injuflice  to  the  public  creditors,  and  a 
violation  of  the  faith  and  honour  of  Parlia¬ 
ment. 

Particular  notice  flaould  be  taken  of  the 
words  of  the  of  Parliament.,  as  they 
have  been  juft  recited.  It  is  evident,  that 
they  make  this  Fund  fuch  a  Fund  as  that 
upon  which  I  have  all  along  argued.  The 
public  taxes  were  made  perpetual ;  and  all 
the  furpluftes  were  to  be  applied  to  the  dii- 
eharge  of  the  public  debts,  and  to  no  other 
purpofe  whatever.  When,  therefore,  a  debt 
^had  been  paid  off,  the  addition  ariftng  from 
that  payment  to  the  furpluftes,  or  the  annuity 
difengaged  by  it,  became  a  part  of  the  Fund, 
and,  together  with  it,  was  to  be  employed 
in  difeharging  farther  debts.  And,  the  fame 
being  true  of  every  fucceftive  annuity  dif- 
engaged  by  every  payment,  the  Fund  was 
.rendered  fuch  an  increaftng  Fund  as  the 
firft  I  have  deferibed  j  or  a  Fund,  which, 
if  never  mifapplied,  muft  have  operated 
in  finking  the  public  debt,  in  the  fame 
way  that  money  accumulates,  when  put  out 
to  bear  compound  intereft.  And  in  this 
way  this  Fund  did  in  fadt  operate  for  a  few 
vears.—Whilc  in  its  infancy,  it  was  watched 
over  with  great  care.  The-  improvement 
and  the  inviolable  application  of  it  were  rc- 

E  commended 


-a 


(  26  ) 

commended  in  moft  of  the  Speeches  from 
the  Throne,  and  echoed  back  in  the  Ad- 
dreffes  of  the  Houje  of  Commons  — In 

confequence  of  the  increafe  of  public  credit 

occalioned 

(a)  King’s  Speech  at  opening  the  Parliament,  Fe¬ 
bruary  20,  1717. - You  are  all  fenfible  of  the  in- 

Jupportahle  weight  of  the  National  Debt,  &c.” - 

Anfwer  of  the  Commom  : — We  are  all  but  too  fenfible 
of  the  infupportable  weight  of  the  National  Debt;  and, 
therefore,  will  not  neglecft  to  apply  ourfelves,  with  all 
poflible  diligence  and  attention,  to  t\\Q  great  andnecej- 
Jary  work  of  reducing  and  leiTening  by  degrees  this 
heavy  burthen,  which  may  prove  the  moll  effedlual 
‘‘  means  of  preferving  to  the  Public  Funds  a  real  and 

certain  fecurity,  5cc.” - King’s  Anfwer.— Your 

refolution  of  applying  yourfelves  to  eafe  my  people,  by 
‘‘  gradually  reducing  the  heavy  load  of  the  Public'Debts, 

deferves  my  hearty  thanks,  ^ - King’s  Speech, 

May  6,  1717-  — I  muft  recommend  to  you,  as  I  did  at 
the  beginning  of  the  Seflion,  to  take  all  proper  me- 

thods  of  reducing  the  Public  Debts»” - Anfwer  of 

the  Commom. — “  We  are  truly  fenfible,  how  much  the 
eafe  and  profperity  of  your  fubjedls,  depends  on  the 
accomplifhing  that  great  and  neceiTary  work  of  re- 
ducing  the  Public  Debts,  and  are  refolved  to  carry  it 

on  in  the  mofl:  effedlual  manner.” - King’s  Speech, 

lyiS. - I  have  the  pleafure  to  obferve  to  you,  that 

‘‘  the  appropriated  for  finking  the  Public  Debts, 

have  anfwered  above  expedlation.” - Add  refs  of 

the  Commons  on  prefenting  a  Money  Bill,  1722. — They 
have  omitted  no  opportunity  of  eafing  the  Public  in- 
cumbrances,  and  of  putting  the  National  Debt  into  a 
“  method  of  payment.  For  no  fooner  had  your  Ma- 
jelly,  by  the  vigilance  of  your  Councils,  and  the  fuc- 
eefs  of  your  arms,  reflored  and  fecured  the  public 
peace,  but  your  Commons  immediately  found  means 
to  reduce  the  intcrefl  of  the  National  Debt,  and 
thereby  fet'  a-part  a  Fund,  which,  by  a  farther  rt- 

du<5lion 


occafioned  by  it,  a  Jecond  reduction  of  in- 
tereft  from  5.  to  4  per  cent,  took  place  in 
the  year  1727,  and  near  400,000/.  per  ann. 
.  .  was 


dudion  of  intereft  fince  made  by  youx  Commons, 

‘‘  will,  in  a  few  years,  be  confiderably  increafed,  and 

the  payment  of  the  Principal  become  pradicable.” - - 

King’s  Speech,  January  9,  1724. — 1  muft,  in  a  par- 
‘‘  ticular  manner^  recommend  to  your  care  the  Public 
Debts  of  this  Kingdom,  as  the  most  national 

CONCERN  YOU  CAN  POSSIBLY  TAKE  INTO  YOUR 
CONSIDERATION.  I  am  peiiuaded  it  muft  be  a  great 
‘‘  fatisfadion  to  all  mv  faithful  Sabje61:s,  to  fee  the 
Sinking  Pund  improved  and  augmented,  and  tne  Debt 
of  the  Nation  thereby  put  into  a  method  of  being  fo 

‘‘  much  the  fooner  reduced  and  paid  off.”- - -Reply 

of  the  Commons. - V/e  are  highly  fenlible  of 

your  Majefty’s  goodnefs  to  all  your  people,  in  rccom- 
mending,  particularly,  at  this  time,  to  our  confide- 
ration  the  Public  Debts  of  the  Kingdom,  which  are 
fo  heavy  a  load  and  fo  much  a  national  concern^  that 
we  fiiould  be  wanting  to  ourfelves,  if  we  did  not' 
afiure  your.Majefty,  that  we  will  ufe  our  utmoft  en- 
deavours  to  improve  and  augment  the  Sinking  Fund^ 
and  therebv  put  the  National  Debt  into  a  method  of 
being  gradually  reduced  and  paid.  And  as  your  Ma- 
jefty  is  pleafed  to  encourage  our  undertaking  fo  great 
and  noble  a  defign,  fo  we  are  fully  perfuaded,  that 
the  wifdom  and  Jhadlnef.  of  your  Majefty’s  Govern- 
ment  will  enable  us  to  perfei^  this  great  undertak- 

4c  incr.” _ -  Reprefentation  made  by  the  Commons  in 

lyzSt  about  the  National  Debt. - The  National 

Debt,  contradled  in  carrying  on  two  long  and  ex- 
penfive  wars,  as  it  was  a  matter  of  the  lafi  confequcnce 
‘‘  to  the  Nation,  was  become  the  care  and  concern  of 
««  all  who  wilhed  well  to  our  prefent  and  future  profpe- 
rity.  This  produced  feveral  confultations  in  Parba- 

menu  to  find  out  and  fettle  fome  means  of  putting 
’  F  9  this 


(  28  ) 

was  added  to  its  income. — So  far  were  our 
minifters  from  being  then  deceived  by  the 
fophifm  which  has  hnce  done  fo  much  inif- 
chief,  that,  whenever  money  was  wanted  for 
defraying  the  necelfary  expences  of  Govern- 

this  great  Debt  into  a  method  of  being  gradually  re- 
duccd  ;  and  the  Sinking  Fund  was  at  laft  happily  efta- 
‘‘  bliflied,  to  a  general  fatisfadtion.  This  Fund  became 
immediately  a  favourite  article  in  all  parliamentary 
coniultations  relating  to  the  public  revenues,  and 
v/as  confidered  as  a  national  intereft,  worthy  of  the 
higheft  regard  and  attention,  vjhich  was  by  all  pofftble 
means  to  he  cherijhed and  improved^  and  the  produce  of 
‘‘  IT  SET  A-PART  AND  KEPT  DISTINCT  FROM  ALU 
OTHER  SERVICES  AND  PURPOSES,  and  was  appropri- 
ated  by  Parliament  to  pay  olF  and  difcharge  National 
Debts  incurred  before  the  25th  Day  of  December, 

1716. - From  this  happy  event  arofe  fuch  general 

fatisfaQion  to  all  degrees  of  people,  that  though  the 
intereft  of  the  Public  Debts  was  reduced,  and  the 
proprietors  ,received  a  lefs  income  from  them  than 
“  before  \  yet,  their  fecurity  for  their  capital  being  fo 
much  mended,  the  rate  or  price  for  the  purchafe  of 
thefe  debts  foon  advanced  to  a  inuch^  higher  value 

“  than  they  were  at  before  the  reduction.” - The 

King’s  Anlwer.— The  provifion  made  for  gradually 
difcharging  the  National  Debt  is  now  become  fo  cer- 
tain  and  confiderable,  that  nothing  but  fome  unfore- 
feen  event  can  alter  or  diminifli  it  ;  which  gives  us 
the  fairefi:  pi  ofpedf  of  feeing  the  old  debts  difeharged  ; 
‘‘  and  you  may  be  afiured,  that  it  fliall  be  my 'particular 
care  and  ftudy  to  maintain  public  credit,  io  improve 

the  Sinking  Fund^  &c.”- - Who,  at  this  time, 

could  have  thought,  that  the  very  adminidration  which 
declared  all  this  anxiety  about  improving  and  cherijhing^ 
by  all  pojjible  tnenns^  the  Sinking  Fund^  would  introduce 
the  pradlige  of  plundering  it  ? 


ment, 


C  29  > 

ment,  it  was  always  (/J)  borrowed,  and  never 
taken  from  hence. 

It  deferves  to  be  particularly  mentioned 
here,  that  in  1726,  an  opinion  had  been 
propagated,  that,  notwithftanding  the  efta- 
blifhment  of  this  Fund,  the  public  debts  had 

been 

•  5of»995 

5OO5OOO 
I5OOO5OOO 

500,000 
370,000 
1,750,000 
1,230,000 
550,000 
1,200,000 
500,000 

The  Sinking  Fund  might  have  fupplied  all  this  money; 
but  rather  than  take  any  Turns  from  it,  the  Land-tax  was 
in  the  year  1726  raifed  from  2x.  to  45.  in  the  pound;  the 
nation  being  then  under  the  apprehenfions  of  a  war. — ~ 
In  1727,  thefe  apprehenfions  continuing,  the  King  in  his 
fpeech  at  the  opening  of  the  Parliament,  after  con¬ 
gratulating  them  on  the  great  addition  that  would  be 
made  that  year  to  the  Sinking  Fund^  warns  them  againft 
being  led  by  the  necessities  of  the  nation  to  a  di- 

verfion  of  it. - Let  all  that  wifti  well  to  the  peace 

and  quiet  of  my  Government,  have  the  fatisfadfion  to 
‘‘  fee,  that  our  PRESENT  necessities  fhall  make  no  in- 
‘‘  terruptipn  in  the  progrefs  of  that  defirable  work  of 
gradually  difcharging  the  National  Debt.  I  hope, 
therefore,  you  will  make  a  provifion  for  the  immediate 
‘‘  application  of  the  produce  of  the  Sinking  Fund  to  the 
ufes  for  which  it  was  fo  wifely  contrived,  and  to  which 

it  ftands  now  appropriated.” - Reply  of  the  Commons, 

that  all  that  wifti  well  to  the  peace  and  quiet  of 

your 


w 

In  1718  was  borrowed  towards  the  Supplies 

1719  -  -  - - 

1720  - -  - -  - - 

1721  — : —  - -  - — ■ 

1725  -  - -  - 

1726  -  -  - 

,727  -  -  - 

1728  —  -  ■  '  ■ 

1729  _  —  —  _ 

1730  -  - -  - - 

1731  _  _  _ 


i 


i 

i 


(  30  ) 

been  for  fome  years  increafing  rather  than 
decreafing.  This  occafioned  the  publication 
of  a  very  curious  and  important  pamphlet, 
in  defence  of  the  Sinking  Fund  and  the  Mi- 
niftry,  entitled.  An  Effliy  on  the  Public  Debts 
of  this  Kingdom.  I  have  now  by  me  the 
fourth  edition  of  this  pamphlet,  and  I  with 
I  could  put  it  into  every  hand  in  the  king¬ 
dom  (a).  It  contains  an  excellent  account 

of 

your  Majefty’s  government,  may  have  the  fatisfa^lion 
to  fee,  that  our  present  necessities  fhall  make 
no  interruption  in  the  progrefs  of  that  defirable  work 
of  gradually  reducing  the  National  Debt,  we  will  con- 
fiderof  the  mofl:  proper  method  for  immediately  apply- 
ing  the  produce  ot  the  Sinking  Fund  to  the  ufes  for 
which  it  was  fo  wifely  contrived,  and  to  which  it 
fi:ands  now  appropriated.’’ 

In  the  following  year  the  Houfe  of  Commons  voted,  that 
the  monies  ifTued  towards  dlfcharging  the  National  Debt, 
from  1716  to  Lady-day  1728,  were  6,648,000/. 

In  1729,  the  nation  being  ftill  threatened  with  a  war, 
extraordinary  fupplies  were  wanted  ;  and  the  Sinking 
Fund  would  have  afforded  all  that  was  neceffary.  But 
the  King  in  his  fpeech,  at  the  opening  of  the  Seffions, 
recommended  it  to  the  care  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  to 
‘‘  apply  it  to  its  proper  ufe.”  And  the  Commons^  in  their 
reply,  affured  him  that  it  fhould  be  fo  applied. - Ac¬ 

cordingly  a  million  of  the  South- fea  Annuities  was 

ordered  to  be  paid  off. - At  this  time,  how’ever,  the 

zeal  of  the  miniftry  for  the  prefervation  of  \\\^  Sinking 
Fund  was  much  abated,  and  indeed  meant  no  more,  than 
that  it  ffould  not  be  robbed  of  any  grofs  fums.  In  the 
preceding  year,  the  furpluffes  belonging  to  it  had  been 
charged  with  the  intereft  of  the  money  then  borrowed  ; 
and  the  fame  was  done  this  year. 

(t?)  This  pamphlet  cannot,  I  fuppofe,  be  now  eafly 

procured.-- — It  was  anfw^ered  in  a  pamphlet,  entitled,  A 
^  State 


5 


(  SI  ) 

•of  the  importance  of  difcharging  the  public 
debts,  and  of  the  provifion  made  for  that 
purpofe  by  the  inftitutioii  of  the  linking 
Fund.  It  proves  particularly,  in  pppofition 

to 


State  of  the  National  Debt ;  and  this  produced  a  fecond 
pamphlet  by  the  author  of  the  Essay,  entitled,  A  Defence 
of  an  Efjay  on  the  Public  Debts  of  this  Kingdom^  in  Anfwer 

to  a  Pamphlet.^  entitled.^  A  State  of  the  National  Debt. - - 

From  the  following  words  in  this  Defejice^  I  conclude, 
that  fome  reference  had  been  made  to  the  Essay,  in  one 

of  the  King’s  Speeches. - The  fuccefs  of  my 

‘‘  on  the  Public  Debts.,  and  the  fatisfa6tion  of  hearino;  from 
the  throne,  that  my  zeal  for  the  prefervation  of  the 
Sinking  Fund  cannot  have  been  difagreeable  to  his  Ma- 
“  jefty,  gives  me  a  pleaiure  that  alone  is  an  ample  re- 
ward  for  my  attempts  to  ferve  my  country.”  p.  64. 
The  following  extra^f,  from  Vol.  7.  of  Hijiory  and 
Proceedings  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons.^  will  perhaps  fhew 

who  the  writers  were  in  this  coniroverfy.^ - ‘‘  Feb. 

“  23.  1 727-28.  the  Committee  of  Supply  refolved  to  raife 
1,750,000/.  on  the  coal  duty.  Hereupon  Mr.  PuL- 
‘‘  TENEY  obferved,  that  the  Ihifting  of  funds  was  but 
‘‘  perpetuating  taxes,  and  putting ofF  the  evil  day;  and 
that  notwithfianding  the  great  merit  that  fome  had 
built  on  the  Sinking  Fundy  it  appeared  that  the  National 
‘‘  Debt  had  been  increafed  fince  the  fetting  up  of  that 
POMPOUS  PROJECT.  On  which  Sir  Nathanael 
Gould,  an  eminent  merchant,  faid,  he  apprehended 
‘‘  that  Gentleman  had  his  notions  out  of  a  Treatife,  en- 
“  titled  A  State  of  the  National  Debty  fuppofed  to  be  writ- 
■  ‘‘  ten  by  that  very  Gentleman  ;  but,  that  if  he  underftood 
any  thing,  it  was  numbers,  and  he  durft  pawn  his  credit 
‘‘  to  prove  that  author’s  calculations  and  inferences  to  be 

‘‘  falfe. - To  this  Mr.  Pulteney  replied,  that  he 

took  them  to  be  right,  and  he  would  likewife  pawn 
his  credit  to  make  good  his  affertion. — -Upon  this  Sir 

“  Robert 


(  32  ) 

to  the  opinion  I  have  mentioned,  that  the 
public  debts  had  decreafed ;  and  that  of  the 
52  millions  then  due,  50  millions  would,  in 
28  years,  [/>)  be  extinguiihed  by  the  Sinking 
Fundi  The  fame  explanation  is  given  of  the 
nature  of  this  Fund  with  that  which  I  have 
given.  The  fame  reprefen tation  is  made  of 
its  powers ;  .and  the  fame  arguments  ufed 
to  demonftrate  the  evil  of  alienating  it,  in 
order  to  avoid  making  new  loans  charged  on 
new  Funds. — And,  in  anfvyer  to  a  fulpicion 
which  was  then  entertained,  that  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  alienating  it  would  be  introduced 
by  our  minifters,  he  obferves,  that  this  would 
be  to  purfue  a  meafure  which  would  deftroy 
all  probability  of  the  payment  of  our  debts  j 
and,  therefore,  he  pronounces  that,  “  as  long 
“  as  the  public  welfare  was  in  the  leaft  re- 

Robert  Walpole  took  up  the  cudgels,  and  faid  he 
would  maintain  what  Sir  Nathanael  Gould  had 

V  advanced. - Several  warm  exprefTions  having  palTed 

on  both  Tides,  Mr.  Hungerford  interpofed  in  a  jocular 
fpeech,  that  put  the  houTe  in  good  humour;  and  To  the 
difpute  ended.” 

It  is  a  reflec^Tion  which  in  my  enquiries  into  the  Hiftory 
of  the  Sinking  Fund,  has  occurred  tome  with  pain;  that, 
while  a  minilteriai  meafure,  .it  was  no  objedl  of  the  zeal 
of  the  Patriotic  Party,  But  as  Toon  as  it  came  to  be  de- 
ferted  by  the  miniftry,  they  took  it  up  warmly. 

(^)  Mr.  Smart  alfo  publilhed,  at  this  time,  calcula¬ 
tions  of  the  fame  kind.  See  his  Tables  of  Interest, 
dedicated  to  the  Governor'  and  Directors  of  the 
Bank  of  Fngland,  ^age  98,  99. 

Hi 


■ 


tc 


a 


( ( 


iC 


€i 


{  33  ) 

garded,  the  nation  might  confidently  cx- 
pe£t,-  that  no  perfon  into  whole  hands  the  ‘ 
adminiftration  of  its  afiairs  might  fall, 
would  ever  approve  of  or  recommend 
any  fuch  meafure,  ht  any' pojjible  exigence 
of^  our  a^atrs.”  Pag.  46.  (12)  —  After  this 


to-  a 


he  goes'  on  in  the  following  vrords.  P  _  _ 

— 1— There  is  another  ’  objedion  to  the 
probability  of  the  payment  of  our  public 
debts,  which,  if  I  did  not  frequently  meet 
with  it,  I  fhould  chufe '  not  to  mention, 
from  my  apprehenfion  that  in  ftating  it, 
as  I  have  met  with  it,  I  fliould  be  obliged 
to  mention  my  fuperiors  with  lefs  decen¬ 
cy,  than  that  grateful  fenfe  of  the  happi- 
nefs  we  enjoy  under  the  prefent  reign, 
would,  on  all  other  occafions,  lead  me  to. 
The  objedion  I  mean  is,  that  the  continu¬ 
ance  of  our  public  debts  is  and  always 
muft  be  the  intereft  of  the  perfons  in  the 
adminiftration  (Jj)  ^  that  the  great  profits 
of  their  employments  arifes  from  hence 
and  that  the  neceftary  power  and  influ-^ 
ence  to  fuppoft  themfelves  in  their  em¬ 
ployments  depend  greariy  on  their  having 
referved  to  themfelves  the  difpofition  of 
the  various  offices  and  employments  in. 

[a)  See  the  Extradts  in  the  Appendix. 

Apprehenfions  of  this  kind  were  entertained  litce- 

wife  in  ‘Dr.  Da ven ant’s  time. - Some  modern 

politicians  (fays  he)  have  run  upon  another  notion, 
and  feveral  perfons  have  thought,  that  the  more  funds 
are  ereded,  the  more  people  are  engaged  to  preferve 
the  prefent  Government Davcnant’s  Works,  Vol. 
II.  page  297. 

P  collecting 


a 


(( 


€C 


€C 


<6 


(  c 


6  6 


(C 


if, 


ii 


iC 


it 


ii 


ii 


V'. 


(  34  ) 

“  colleftlng  and  applying  the  Revenue  ap¬ 
propriated  to  the  payment  of  the  public 

“  debts,” - In  anfwering  this  objedlion, 

this  writer  acquaints  the  public,  that  what¬ 
ever  truth  there  might  be  in  it,  nothing  can 
have  been  or  will  be  more  lincerely  endea¬ 
voured  by  the  fervants  of  the  crown,  than 
the  difeharge  of  the  public  debts.  He  takes 
notice  of  the  remotenefs  of  thofe  views  of 
intereft  which  might  render  our  minifters 
unwilling  to  give  up  the  public  debts ;  and 
then  concludes  with  this  general  inference 
from  all  his  obfervations — “  That  the  pro- 
“  vifion  which  had  been  made  of  the  Sinking 
“  Fund,  was  an  expedient,  from  which  the 
“  full  and  effedlual  payment  of  the  principal 
“  of  the  national  debt,  in  a  few  years,  might, 
with  great  alfurance,  be  expedled.” 

Such  was  the  language,  and  fuch  were  the 
fentiments  of  the  rniniftry  and  its  friends, 
in  the  year  1726. — Would  to  God  they  had 
continued  in  thefe  fentiments.  But  they  foon 
changed ;  and  it  appeared  that  the  fufpicions 
which  this  writer  had  taken  pains  to  remove, 
and  which  (in  Pag.  62.)  he  had  called  inde¬ 
cent  jealoujies,  were  but  too  well  grounded. 

Charging  the  income  of  the  Sinking  Fund 
with  the  payment  of  the  intereft  of  new 
loans,  is  an  encroachment  upon  it,  no  lefs 
fubverlive  oi  its  efticacy,  than  depriving  it 
of  grofs  fums ;  there  being  evidently  no  dif¬ 
ference  between  taking  from  it  the  a7inual 
interef,  of  a  fum,  and  that  fum  itfelf. — This 

writer 


(  35  ) 

writer  faw  this,  and  therefore  declared, 
“  that,  in  his  opinion,  it  was  impossible 
“  it  fhould  ever  be  done.”  Pag.  50.  —  But 
how  miferably  was  he  deceived  by  the  con¬ 
fidence  he  placed  in  his  friends  in  power  ? — 
In  a  little  time  after  this,  that  alienation 
which  he  thought  could  never  be  propofed, 
much  lefs  fucceeded  in,  was  begun  in  the 
very  manner  that  he  had  declared  to  be  im¬ 
possible.  Between  the  year  ly^y*  ^od 
1732,  feveral  new  loans  were  made;  and 
furpluffes,  that  of  right  belonged  to  the  Sink- 
Fund,  were  charged  with  them.  This 
reduced  its  income  confiderably  below  what 
it  fliould  have  been.  But,  being  an  encroach¬ 
ment  of  a  lefs  open  nature,  it  cud  not,  as  far  as 
I  can  find,  produce  any  particular  oppofition. 

_ From  this  period,  however,  we  muft  date 

the  ruin  of  the  Sinking  Fund.—~'F\\Q  finifliing 
blow  was  given  it  on  the  following  occa- 

fion. 

In  the  year  1732,  the  land-tax  had  been 
reduced  to  i  s.  in  the  pound  ;  and,  in  order 
to  fupply  the  deficiency  arifing  from  hence, 
half  a  million  had  been  procured  for  tlie 
current  fervice,  by  the  revival  of  the  falt-du- 
ties,  which,  but  two  years  before,  had  been 
repealed,  becaufe  reckoned  too  burthenfome 
on  the  poor. — ■ — In  the  year  I733»  older 
to  keep  the  land-tax  as  low  as  it  had  been 
the  year  before,  it  was  neceffary  either  to 
borrow  another  half  million,  or  to  take  it 

from  the  Sinking  Fund.  The  lafl  method 

F  2  'vas 


was  chofen  ;  and  propofed  by  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  to  the  Hoiife  of  Commons. — ^ 
JLong  and  warm  debates  enfued  (^)— A  pro- 
pofal  to  alienate,  in  a  time  of  profound  peace, 
a  fund  which  the  law  had  made  facred,  and 
the  alienation  of  which  no  poffible  exigence 
of  public  ajffairs  could  juftify,  only  for  the 
fake  of  keeping  the  land-tax  for  one  year  at 
IS.  in  the  pound,  juftly  kindled  the  indigna¬ 
tion  of  the  Patriotic  Party,  They  urged  the 
prohibition  of  the  law,  the  faith  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  and  the  fecurity  of  the  kingdom.  The 
propofer  of  the  alienation  was  reminded  of  his 
inconfudency  and  treachery,  in  endeavouring 
to  beat  down  that  very  monument  of  Glory 
which  he  had  boafted  of  haying  eredled  for 
himfelf;  and  Sir  John  Barnard  warned 
him,  that  he  was  drawing  upon  himfelf  the 
curfes  of  pofterity.^ — -But  all  arguments  were 

vain. 

(^)  See  Vol.  viii.  of  the  Hiflory  and  Proceedings  of 
iiouje  of  Commons,  Or,  XhQ  Mif  or i cal  Regift ej\  Vol. 

page  218. - In  the  account  of  this  debate  I  don’t 

hnd  the  argument,  on  which  alienations  have  been  fince 
grounded,  once  intimated.  After  the  publication  I  have 
liicntioned,  it  could  fcarcejy  deceive  any  perfon  :  Nor, 
indeed,  in  the  prefent  cafe,  could  it  have  been  urged  vvith 
any  tolerable  decency  ;  for  there  was  no  public  exigence 
which  rendered  an  extraordinary  fupply  neceffary. 

^  In  the  Houfe  of  Lords  alfo  this  alienation  was 
warmly  oppofed.  Lord  Carteret,  Lord  Bathurst, 
and  others,  infiRed,  that  the  application  of  the  Sinking 
.J’ und  to  any  other  ufe  than  the  payment  of  the  public 
<lebts,  vvas  robbing  the  public  creditors,  bccaufe  it  was 
depriving  them  ot  their  fecurity  for  their  principal  ; 
and  doing  injuftice  to  the  whole  people  of  England,  he- 


JHmJiUU  •  iMli*  <n 


(  37  ) 

vain. — The  mlniftry  pleaded  that  the  landed 
intereft  wanted  eafe  ^  that  there  was  no  oc- 
cafion  for  being  in  a  hurry  to  pay  the  Na¬ 
tional  Debt;  and  that  the  circumftances  of 
the  kingdom  had  altered  fo  much  fince  the 
eftabliilnnent  of  the  Sinking  Fund,  that  the 

caiife  it  was  taking  from  them  the  only  means,  by  which 
they  could  expect  to  be  freed  from  the  taxes  under  which 
they  groaned.  See  The  Hljhry  and  Proceedings  of  the 
Boufe  of  Lords,  VoL  4th,  pag.  155,  &c.  ‘‘  It  is  true, 

that  after  a  certain  provifion  had  been  made  for  pay- 
ing  off  the  principal,  in  a  term  within  every  man’s 
view,  it  began  to  be  a  conteft  among  the  public  credi- 
tors,  who  fhould  be  Inft  paid  off.  But  if  two  or  three 
more  mifapplications  fhould  be  ma<Je,  the  only  conteft 
will  be,  who  fhall  be  firft  paid  off ;  becaufe  every  man 
‘‘  will  begin  to  be  afraid,  that  an  entire  ffop  will  be  put 
‘‘  to  the  annuity,  as  well  as  the  payment  of  the  princi- 
“  pal,  before  the  laft  creditors  could  be  paid  off'.”  Ibid, 

p.  51 1.- - — When  any  additional  tax  is  impofed, 

the  public  feel  the  wTight  of  the  annual  public  ex- 
pence.  i  his  puts  them  upon  enquiring  into  the  ne- 
cefTity  for  that  expence  ;  and  when  they  can  fee  no  ne- 
ceffity  for  it,  they  murmur,  and  thofe  murmurs  become  . 
dangerous  to  the  miniffers.  Whereas  no  man  feels 
what  is  taken  from  the  Sinking  Fund  ;  therefore  no 
man  enquires  into  the  necellity  of  that  expence,  which 
occaffons  its  being  plundered  ;  and  for  this  reafon  it 
will  be  aly/ays  looked  upon  by  miniffers  as  a  fund 
‘‘  which  they  may  fquander  with  fafety.  But  this  may, 
and  will  probably  at  laff,  fall  heavy  on  fome  prince  of 
his  majeffy’s  family.  At  the  fame  time  that  he  will 
lee  almoft  all  the  revenues  in  the  kingdom  mortgaged 
for  old  debts,  he  may  find  himfelf  engaged  in  a  war  as 
expenfive  as  was  that  war  which  occafioned  tbefe 
debts.  And  this  is  fo  melancholy  a  profpedi,  that  thq 
mere  poffibility  of  its  exiffing  muff  give  the  moff  af-  ^ 
fe6fing  foi  rovv  to  every  man  vaho  has  the  fecurity  and 
honour  of  the  prefent  Royal  Family  at  heart.”  Ibid, 
p.  5 1 1.— -See  Note  E,  Jpl'cndix, 


com- 


(  38  ) 

competition  then  among  the  public  creditor's 
was,  not  who  fliould  be  firfi,  but  who  (hould 
be  lafi  paid.  Thus  argued  among  others 
Sir  Robert  Walpole.  His  reafons  pre¬ 
vailed  ;  and  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  not  ufed 
to  refufe  him  any  thing,  confented. 

The  praftice  of  alienating  the  Sinking 
Fund  having  been  thus  begun,  it  went  on 
of  courfe.  In  the  next  year,  or  1734, 
1,200,000/.  was  taken  from  it.  In  1735, 
it  was  even  anticipated  and  mortgaged. 

Thus  then  expired,  after  an  exiftcnce  of 
about  eleven  years,  the  Sinking  Fund — that 
facred  Bleffing  —  Once  the  Nation’s  only 
hope, — prematurely  and  cruelly  deftroyed  by 

its  own  parent. - Could  it  have  efcaped  the 

hands  of  violence,  it  would  have  made  us 
the  envy  and  the  terror  of  the  world,  by 
leaving  us  at  this  time,  not  only  Tax-free, 
but  in  poffeffion  of  a  treafure,  greater  per¬ 
haps  than  was  ever  enjoyed  by  any  kingdom. 

- But,  let  me  not  dwell  on  a  recollec¬ 
tion  fo  grievous. 

It  is  unavoidable  here  to  enquire,  how  the 
conduct  of  om Parliame?tts  or  Mmijicrs,  in  this 

inftance,  can  be  accounted  for - Were  they 

indeed  ignorant  of  the  powers  of  the  Sinking 

Fund? - 1  doubt  not  but  this  has  been  true 

of  moft  of  our  late  minillers.  But  that  reci¬ 
tal  of  fadls  which  I  have  given  proves,  that, 
in  the  period  of  which  1  am  fpeaking,  it 

(i)  See  Page  12. 


could 


(  39  ) 

/ 

could  not  have  been  true. — —I  am  afraid 
therefore,  that  the  moft  candid  will,  on  this 
occafion,  find  themfelves  under  a  neceffity  of 
giving  way  to  the  fufpicion,  which  the  excel¬ 
lent  author  I  have  fo  often  quoted,  has  called 
an  indecent  jealoufy.  The  powers  of  the 
Sinking  Fund  were,  perhaps,  but  too  well 
known.  It  had  been  ■  demonflrated,  as  we 
have  fecn,  in  a  performance  generally  read 
and  even  referred  to  from  the  throne,  that,  in 
a  few  years,  it  would  have  annihilated  the 
whole  National  Debt.  In  confequence  of 
having  been  carefully  nurfed  and  cherifhed 
for  eleven  years,  it  had  acquired  a  vigour, 
that  promifed  much  more  than  was  ever  ex- 
pedled  from  it.  .The  lofs,  therefore,  of  the 
dependence  created  by  the  National  Debt,  and 
of  the  fecurity  it  gave  to  the  Hanoverian 
fuccefllon  and  the  adminiftration,  was 
brought  in  too  near  view.  And  in  thefe 
circumftances,  it  is  not  ftrange,  that  the 
policy  of  our  Governors  fhould  take  a 
new  turn,  and  that  the  rum  of  the  Sinking 
Fund  fhould  become  no  lefs  a  meafure  of 
date,  than  its  improvement  had  been.— — — 
My  confcience  obliges  me  to  take  this  op¬ 
portunity  to  add,  that  fimilar  meafures  were, 
at  this  time,  purfued  in  another  inflance  of 
no  lefs  importance.  For  like  reafons,  and 
w'ith  like  views,  a  pernicious  influence 
was  maintained  and  promoted  in  the  Houfe  of 
Commons,  which  has  lapped  the  confti- 

4  tution  i 


(  4°  )  . 

tution ;  and  which  may  in  time  ertablifl) 
among  us  a  tyranny  of  the  moft  intolerable 
kind  ;  a  tyranny  attended  with  the  mockery 
of  all  the  forms  of  liberty;  a  tyranny  created, 
fupported  and  fanctihed  by  a  Parli  at^ent.' 
— — This  is,  in  truth,  the  fundamental  griev¬ 
ance  of  the  kingdom ;  and  that  Patriotifm, 
the  firft  object  of  which,  is  net  the  removal 
of  it,  can  be  nothing  but  an  impofture.  To 
this  grievance  we  owe,  among  other  evils,  the 
lofs  of  the  Sinking  Fund.  Had  the  guardians 
of  the  State  been  under  no  undue  influence,, 
they  would  have  been  more  faithful ;  and 
could  not  have  given  up  this  great  fecurify 

of  the  kingdom. - Unhappy  Britain  — 

How  long  art  thou  to  lie  thus  bleeding? - - 

How  long  are  thy  deareft  rights  to  be  facri- 
ficed  to  temporary  expedients,  and  a  narrow 
and  felfifh  policy  ?  — — —  When  lhall  thy 
Parliaments  recover  independence  and 
dignity,  and  become  once  more  awful  to 
Minifters  of  State  ? 

But  I  am  in  danger  of  digreffing  too  far. 


I  have  been  frequently  obliged  to  refer  to 
the  Obfervations  on  the  National  Debt  in 
my  Treatife  on  Annuities.  Indeed,  one  of 
my  defigns  in  this  Appeal,  is  to  engage  at¬ 
tention  to  thole  Obfervations  ;  and,  therefore, 
I  will  here  beg  leave  to  recapitulate  fome  of 
the  chief  of  them,  that  all  who  will  look 

into 


na 


tafM 


(  4'  ) 

into  this  Pamplilet  may  be  able  to'  judge 
how  far  tliey  delerve  notice. 

Firfl',  Such  a  Fimd  as  I  have  propofed  in 
that  1  reatilc,  and  here  more  fully  explained, 
would  difcharge  tlie  largeji  debts  that  a  State 
could  have  occafion  to  contradt,  at  a  fmall 
expence,  and  in  as  little  time  as  its  intercft 
could  poffibly  require.— For  example.  An 
annual  faving  of  200,000/.  applied,  without 
hiterruption,  from  the  year  1700,  would, 
long  before  this  time,  have-  difcharged  above 
eighty  millions  of  our  debts  gradually 
and  infenfibly,  and  without  interfering  with 
any  of  the  other  meafures  or  refources  of 

Government. - K  tax  on  celibacy  alone 

might,  in  this  way,  have  been  made  the 
means  of  bearing  mod:  of  the  Public  Ex- 
pences  \  at  the  fame  time  that,  by  promot-; 
ing  population,  it  increafed  the  number  of 
our  people. — Fund  yielding  i/.  per  cent. 
furplus  annexed  to  a  loan  at  6  per  cent^ 
would,  befides  paying  the  interefl,  difcharge 
the  principal  in  thirty -three  years.  A  Fund 

(a)  In  this  year  it  would  have  paid  off  96  millions 
and  a  half,  and  difengaged  3?555?ooo/,  of  the  public 
taxes.  And  (in  pag.  6.)  it  is  fhewn,  that  in  eighty- 
fix  years,  fuppofing  it  all  along  applied  to  the  redemp¬ 
tion  of  debts  bearing  5  per  cent,  intercft,  it  would  pay 

off  262  millions. - In  fbort  ;  there  is  not  a  Penny 

wafted  in  the  manatfement  of  the  Revenue,  or  ivorfe 
than  wafted,  by  being  given  to  hungry  dependents,  which 
miorht  not  be  made  a  mine  of  inexhauftible  wealth  to  the 

C5 

Kingdom.  See  pag.  19. 

G 


producing 


ma 


(  42  ) 


producing  the  fame  furplus  annexed  to  a  loan 
at  5  per  cent,  would  difchargc  the  principal, 
in  thirty-feven  years;  at  4  per  cent^  in  forty- 

one  years. - A  faving  of  a  million  and  a 

half  per  annum  continued  for  tvv^enty  years, 
(or  only  for  eighteen-  years,  fuppofing  ma¬ 
nagement  ufed,  or  a  war  to  come)  might, 
(with  the  help  of  a  faving  of  200,000  A 
which  will  arife  in  1781,  from  the  redudlion 
of  the  4  per  cents)  be  fo  improved  as  to  eafe 
the  Nation,  at  the  end  of  that  term,  of  a 
MILLION  AND  A  HALF  per  annum  of  the 
moft  oppreflive  taxes ;  and,  at  the  end  of 
forty-one  years,  of  three  millions  per 
annum  more  in  taxes  (^) :  And  the  nation,  if 
capable  of  bearing  its  increafing  burdens  for 

fomc 


[a)  See  Treatife  on  Annuities,  p.  156. - Were  the 

managers  of  our  affairs  to  enter  with  zeal  into  fuch  a 
propofal  as  this,  they  might  probably  find  means  of  im¬ 
proving  the  Sinking  Fund  fo  far,  as  to  make  it  capable  of 
yielding  the  whole  annual  fum  here  mentioned,  over 
and  above  all  the  fums  neceflary  for  fupplying  the  defi¬ 
ciencies  of  the  peace  eftablifhment. - Let  this,  how¬ 

ever,  be  granted  to  be  impoflible  ;  and  let  the  fums  it 
wants  of  fuch  a  furplus  be  borrowed  every  year.  From 
pag.  17.  it  may  be  inferred,  that  this  (fuppofing  the 
fums  borrowed  not  to  exceed  half  a  million  annually) 
would  make  no  great  difference  in  the  efficiency  of  the 
fcheme  :  And,  at  the  fame  time,  by  providing  for  the 
public  creditors  a  way  of  returning  part  of  the  money 
annually  paid  them,  it  would  be  attended  with  fomc 

advantages. - Every  fuch  meafure  is,  I  have  fhewn, 

only  a  courfe  of  borrowing  fums  at  fmple  intereff,  in 
order  to  improve  them  at  compound  i“tcreft :  And,  as  the 

A  benefits 


(  43  ) 

fbme  time  longer,  would  be  then  completely 
extricated. 

2dly,  Such  a  Fund  would  render  it  of 
little  or  no  confcquence  what  intered;  a  State 
paid  for  any  loans. - Concerning  reduc¬ 

tions  of  intered:  it  has  been  proved,  that 
they  are  not  attended  with  the  advantages 
commonly  imagined ;  and  that,  as  hitherto 
managed  among  us,  they  have  been  indeed 
only  expied'mtts  which  have  pojipmed  a  public 

benefits  hence  arifing  become  in  time  infinite,  there 

IS  NOTHING  THAT  A  STATE  MAY  NOT  DO  BY  IT. 

— - With  the  effect  of  fuch  a  fcheme,  compare  the 

effect  of  paying  ofi:'  a  tniUion^  or  a  million  and  a  half^ 

now  and  then,  in  a  time  of  peace  only. - This  is  the 

paltry  plan  wc  arc  purfuing. - With  a  Sinking  Fund 

which,  at  an  average,  has  for  feveral  of  the  laft  years 
yielded  iwd)  millions  arid  a  quarter  \  and  with  the  land- 
tax  alfo  at  4.S.  and  35.  in  the  pound  ;  we  have,  during 
a  peace  of  near  ten  years,  paid  ofi'  about  eight  millions  ; 
and,  in  this  way  of  going  on,  we  fliall,  if  the  peace 
lafts  NINETY  YEARS,  reduce  our  debts  to  the  ftate  they 

were  in  eighteen  years  ago. - Flave  fuch  meafures  any 

tendency  to  fave  us  ?  Is  there  any  probability,  that  the 
■payment  of  even  Hvo  millions  annually,  from  this  time  to 
the  commencement  of  another  war,  would  do  us  any 

o;reat  fervice? - Miferable  refle^lion  ! — That  it  fhould 

be  poffible  for  our  minifiers,  in  defiance  of  a  law  which 
has  efiablifhed  the  moff  efficacious  of  all  plans,  and  the 

kingdom  finking;  to  go  on  in  fuch  a  way. - Had  the 

fcheme  here  propofed  been  begun  as  foon  as  the  lall  war 
ended,  w^e  fhould  now  have  feen  ourfelves,  within  a  tew 
years  of  the  extinction  of  a  third  of  all  the  taxes  that 
pay  the  intereft  of  the  National  Debt.  The  3  per  cents 
alfo  would  now  have  been  near  par;  and  when  a  war 
came  (fuppofino;  the  kino^dom  convinced  that  no  more 
alienations  would  take  place)  all  the  money  neceiiary  to 
carry  it  on  might  hav-e  been  procured  on  eaiy  terms. 

G  2  bank- 


j 


(  44  ) 

bankruptcy,  by  lejjening  the poljibtlity  oi  avoids 
ingit(^). 

3dly,  A  war  would  either  have  710  ejffedl 
.on  the  public  Funds;  or,  if  it  had,  would 
accelerate  the  payment  of  the  public  debts, 
in  proportion  to  that  effedl  (c). 

4thly,  That  fludtuation  in  the  Stocks 
would  be  prevented,  which  now  lays  the 
foundation  of  fo  much  evil ;  and  which 
(with  the  help  oi a7inual Lotteries)  is  likely  in 
time  to  deftroy  all  honeft  induftry  among  us, 
and  to  convert  us  into  a  nation  of  gamblers. 

5^hly,  Public  credit  would  be  always 
kept  firm  and  flourifiiing  by  fuch  a  Fund  ; 
and  all  thofe  dangers  which  attend  our  pre- 
fent  exorbitant  debt  would  be  removed. 

6thly,  It  is  not  poflible,  there  fhould  be 
any  method  of  difcharging  public  debts  fo 

cheap  and  effedlual.  - - All  methods  of, 

paying  debts  or  raifing  money  by  Life- 
Annuities  arc,  in  particular,  ihewn  to  be 
wafteful,  the  lame  ends  being  equally  attain¬ 
able  with  lefs  trouble,  and  at  near  half  the 
expence. - Should,  therefore,  the  mana¬ 

gers  of  our  affairs  ever  determine  to  enter 
into  vigorous  mcafures  for  reducing  our 
debts,  they  will  be  eafed  of  all  trouble  in 
examining  fchemes.  They  have  nothing  to 
do,  but  to  carry  into  execution  a  fcheme 

{h)  Treatife  on  Annuities,  pag.  140,  kc. 

ff)  Ibtd.  p,  15J,  &c.  See  alio,  p,  17.  of  this  Appeal. 

which 


(  45  ). 

which  lies  before  them,  and  which  the  law 


has  long  fince  eftablifhed. 

Among  the  evils  produced  by  the  National 
Debt,  there  is  one  of  which  the  Public  has 
not  been  yet  fufficiently  apprized;  and  which, 
therefore,  I  muft  here  beg  leave  particularly 
to  mention.  I  mean ;  that  Depopulation 
which  has  been  going  on  among  us,  ever 
lince  it  began.  A  Depopulation  fo  great, 
as  to  have  reduced  the  number  of  inhabi¬ 
tants  in  England  and  Wales,  near  a 
Quarter  in  eighty  years ;  or  from  about 

SIX  MILLIONS,  to  about  FOUR  MILLIONS 
AND  A  HALF.  Ill  the  Supplement  to  the 
Treatife  on  Annuities,  p.  ^^g,6cc.  I  have  given 
an  account  of  the  fails  which  prove  this  (a); 
and  there  is  nothing  that  ought  to  alarm 
more,  or  to  engage  more  the  immediate  at¬ 
tention  of  Government. — Among  the  caufes 
of  it,.  I  have  mentioned  the  engroffing  of 
farms  ;  the  emigrations  to  our  fettlements 
in  the  and  Weji  Indies ;  and  the  great 
increafe,  lince  the  Revolution,  of  our 
continental  connexions,  of  our  navy  and 
army,  and  of  commerce  and  luxury. — But 
the  National  Debt  is  likewife  to  be  reckoned 
one  of  its  principal  caufes.  Its  neceflary 

tendency  is  to  produce  this  elfeil- - It  is  a 

common  obfervation,  and  probably  not  very 
far  from  the  truth,  that  ha!fi\\Q  price  of  all 
the  articles  of  confumption  is  caufed  by 

[a)  See  the  conclufion  of  the  Appendix. 


f 


(  ) 

our  taxes.  They  double,  therefore,  the  price 
of  every  thing  j  and,  by  increafing  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  of  fupporting  a  family,  they  dif- 
.  courage  marriage  and  promote  licentioufnefi. 

■ - There  is  no  political  maxim  more  cer¬ 

tain,  than  that  population  thrives  in  a  coun¬ 
try,  in  proportion  to  the  eafe  with  which  the 
means  of  fubfiftence  can  be  procured.  In  a 
country,  therefore,  where  they  are  all  loaded 

with  taxes,  population  muft  decline. - It 

has,  I  know,  been  afl'erted  in  anfwer  to  this, 
that  though  taxes  increafe  the  price  of  the 
means  of  fubfiftence,  they  increafe  alfo  in 
an  equal  proportion  the  price  of  labour;  and, 
confequently,  cannot  render  the  fupport  of  a 
family  lefs  eafy.  But  no  obfervation  can  be 
more  groundlefs  than  this.  It  is  true  only 
of  an  increafe  in  the  price  of  the  means  of 
fubfiftence,  produced  by  the  importation  of 
money  into  a  country.  As  far  as  it  is  pro¬ 
duced  by  taxes,  it  has  exadlly  the  fame  effect 
with  a  fear  city. - When  there  is  an  in¬ 

creafe,  of  money  in  a  country,  it  will  by 
degrees  get  into  the  hands  of  all,  and  there¬ 
fore,  all  will  be  as  well  able  to  pay  more  for 
every  neceftary  of  life,  as  they  were  before 
able  to  pay  lefs.  But  this  cannot  be  the 
cafe  if  more  muft  be  paid,  and  yet  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  money  remains  the  fame.  In  this 
cafe,  poverty  and  difficulties  muft  be  intro¬ 
duced  :  And  thefe  will  be  increafed,  if  lux¬ 
ury  co-operates  with  taxes,  by  producing  a 
greater  number  of  wants,  and  rendering 

more 


(  47  ) 

more  of  the  articles  of  confuniptiori  necef- 

fary. - Moderate  taxes  may,  by  quickening 

induftry,  be  fo  far  an  advantage :  But  they 
always  check  population.  And  there  is  a 
limit  which,  when  they  exceed,  they  muft 

produce  ruih.^-^ - In  a  word  ;  not  only  the 

prefervation  of  our  Trade  and  Libera- 

ties  5 


(a)  Nothing,  in  my  opinion,  can  be  more  replete 
with  mifehief  to  a  free  people,  than  fuch  a  debt  as  ours 

is. - 1  have  mentioned  (in  the  Trcatife  on  Annuities, 

pag.  1 6 1.)  the  danger  to  which  it  expofes  us  from  fo¬ 
reign  enemies^  by  making  us  fearful  of  war  ;  and  from 
domejiic  enemies^  by  making  us  fearful  of  the  confequen- 
ces  of  oppofition  to  arbitrary  meafures.  Indeed,  I  look 
upon  the  public  creditors  as  little  better  than  a  band  of 
penfioners  to  the  Government ;  and  it  is  more  than  pro^ 
bable,  that  had  the  nation  been  encumbered  with  our 
■prefent  debts  in  the  reigns  of  King  Charles  the  1ft.  or 
James  thelld.  the  former  would  never  have  loft  his  Vfe^ 

nor  the  latter  his  crown. - Thus  much  ffays 

Mr.  Juftice  Blackstone  in  his  Commentaries^  vol.  i. 
book  I.  chap.  8.)  is  indifputably  certain,  that  the  pre- 
fent  magnitude  of  our  national  incumbrances  very  far 
exceeds  all  calculations  of  commercial  benefit,  and  is 
produeSlive  of  the  greateft  inconveniencies.  For  ift. 
The  enormous  taxes,  that  are  raifed  upon  the  necef- 
faries  of  life  for  the  payment  of  the  intereft  of  this 
debt,  are  a  hurt  both  to  trade  and  manufadures,  by 
raifing  the  price  as  well  of  the  artificer’s  fubfiftence, 
as  of  the  raw  material,  and  of  courfe,  in  a  much 
greater  proportion,  the  price  of  the  commodity  itfelf. 
Secondly,  If  part  of  this  debt  be  owing  to  foreigners, 
either  they  draw  out  of  the  kingdom  annually  a  con- 
fiderable  quantity  of  fpecie  for  the  intereft  ;  or  elfe  it 
«  is  made  an  argument  to  grant  them  unreafonable 
privileges  in  order  to  induce  them  to  refide  here. 
Thirdly,  If  the  whole  be  owing  to  fubjeds  only,  it 

is  then  charging  the  a6Iive  and  induftrious  fubjcdl, 
°  ‘‘  who 


II 


(  48  ) 

TIES;  but  the  very  Being  of  the  State 

depends  at  prefent  on  the  redudion  of  our 
debts. 

i 

There  is  one  objedion  which,  probably, 
has  been  often  offering  itfelf  to  every  reader ; 

and 

‘‘  who  pays  his  fhare  of  the  taxes,  to  maintain  the  idle 
and  indolent  creditor  who  receives  them.  Laftly  and 
principally,  It  weakens  the  internal  ftrength  of  a 
State,  by  anticipating  thofe  refources  which  fhould  be 
“  referved  to  defend  it  in  cafe  of  neceility.  The  interefl 
we  now  pay  for  our  debts  would  be  nearly  fufHcient 
to  maintain  any  war,  that  any  national  motives  could 
lequire.  And  if  our  anceftors  in  King  J'VillldTn  s  time 
had  annually  paid,  fo  long  as  their  exigencies  lafted, 
even  a  lefs  fum  than  we  now  annually  raife  upon  their 
accounts,  they  would  in  the  time  of  war  have  born 
‘‘  no  greater  burdens  than  they  have  bequeathed  to  and 
fettled  upon  their  pofterity  in  time  of  peace  ;  and  might 

have  been  eafed  the  inftant  the  exigence  washover. — . 

But  (befides  thefe  inconveniencies)  our  National  Debt 
and  taxes  have,  in  their  natural  confequences,  thrown 
fuch  a  weight  of  power  into  the  executive  fcale  of 
‘‘  government,  as  we  cannot  think  was  intended  by  our 
patriot  ancehors,  who  glorioufly  ftruggled  for  the  abo- 
lition  of  the  then  formidable  parts  of  the  prerogative, 
‘‘  and  by  an  unaccountable  want  of  forefight  eilablifhed 
this  fyftem  in  their  ftead.  The  entire  colledfion  and 
“  management  of  fo  vafl:  a  revenue,  being  placed  in  the 
hands  of  the  crown,  have  given  rife  to  fuch  a  multitude 
‘‘  of  new  ofEcers,  cieated  by  and  removeable  at  the  royal 
pleafure,  that  they  have  extended  the  influence  of  go- 
vernment  to  every  corner  of  the  nation.  Witnefs  the 
commiflioners,  and  the  multitude  of  dependents  on  the 
cuftoms  in  every  port  of  the  kingdom  ;  the  comniif- 
fioncrs  of  excife,  and  their  numerous  fubaltcrns,  in 

every 


.  m 


t 


(  49 

and  wnich,  tho  I  cannot  anfwer  it,  I  mud: 
riiention.  “  Snppofe,”  it  will  he  faid, 
“  inch  a  Jund  eftablidied,  as  has  been  here 
deferibed;  or,  which  is  the  fame,  “  fuppole 

“  the 


every  inland  diftria;  the  poftmafters  and  their  fer- 
vants,  planted  in  every  town,  and  upon  every  public 
road  ;  the  commiffioncrs  of  the  ftamps,  and  their  diC- 
tnbutors,  which  are  full  as  fcattered  and  full  as  nume- 
rous;  the  officers  of  the  fait  duty,  which,  tho’  a  fpecies 
t)  excife^  and  conduced  in  the  fame  manner,  are  yet 
^  made  a  oiuincSl  corps  from  the  ordinary  manai^ers  of 
^  that  revenue  ;  the  furveyors  of  houfes  and  winJov/s  ; 

the  receivers  of  the  land-tax  ;  the  managers  of  lot- 
^  teries;  and  the  commilBoners  of  hackney  coaches  ;  all 
^  v\hich  are  either  mediately  or  immediately  appointed 
by  the  crown,  and  removeable  at  pleafure  without  any 
reafon  afligned  :  Thefe,  it  requires  but  little  penetra- 
tion  to  fee,  muff  give  ^that  power,  on  which  they  dc- 
pend  for  fubfiftence,  an  influence  moll  amazingly  ex- 
tenfive.  To  this  may  be  added  the  frequent  opportu- 
nities  of  conferring  particular  obligations,  by  prefer- 
ence  in  loans,  fubfcriptions,  tickets,  remittances,  and 
other  money  tfanladiions,  which  v/ill  greatly  incrcafe 
this  influence;  and  ovar  thofc  perfons  whole  attaLh^ 
ment,on  account  of  their  wealth,  is  frequently  moft  de- 
firable.  All  this  is  the  natural,  tho’  perhaps  the  un- 
foreleen,  confequence  of  eredfing  our  funds  of  credit, 
and  to  lupport  them  efl-ablifhing  our  prefent  perpetual 
taxes :  he  Vv'hole  of  which  is  entirely  new  fince  the 

refioration  in  1660,  and  by  far  the  greatefl  part  fince 
the  revolution  in  1688.  And  the  fame  may  be  faid 
with  regard  to  the  olliccrs  in  our  numerous  army,  and 
the  places  which  the  army  has  created.  All  which 
put  together  gives  the  executive  pov/er  fo  perfuafive 
‘‘  an  energy  with  refpedt  to  the  perfons  tliemfelves,  and 
fo  prevailing  an  intereil:  with  their  friends  and  families, 
as  will  amply  make  amends  for  the  lofs  of  cxiernal 
prerogative* 


H 


‘‘  But 


(  5*^  ) 

“  the  Sinking  Fund  reftored.  What  fe- 
“  curity  can  be  obtained  for  the  faithful  and 

“  inviolable  application  of  it?” - Were  I 

to  propofe,  in  anfwer  to  this  enquiry,  guard¬ 
ing 


But  tho’  this  profufion  of  offices  fhould  have  no  effedl 
‘‘  on  individuals,  there  is  ftill  another  newly  acquired 
branch  of  power;  and  that  is,  not  the  influence  only, 

“  but  the  force  of  a  difciplined  army:  paid  indeed  ulti- 
matelv  by  the  people,  but  immediately  by  the  crown, 

“  raifed  by  the  crown,  officered  by  the  crown,  com- 
mandcd  by  the  crown.  They  are  kept  on  foot  it  is 
“  true  only  from  year  to  year,  and  thafby  the  power  of 
‘‘  Parliament:  but  during  that  year  they  muft,  by  the 
nature  of  our  conflitution,  if  raifed  at  all,  be  at  the  ab-, 
folute  difpofal  of  the  crowm.  And  there  need  but  few 
‘‘  words  to  demonftrate,  how  great  a  trufl:  is  thereby  re- 
“  pofed  in  the  prince  by  his  people.  A  trufl,  that  is 
more  than  equivalent  to  a  thoufand  little  troublefome 

prerogatives. - Add  to  all  this,  that,  befides  the  civil 

lift,  die  immenfe  revenue  of  feven  millions  fterling, 
which  is  annually  paid  to  the  creditors  of  the  public, 
‘‘  or  carried  to  the  Sinking  Fund,  is  firft  depofited  in  the 
Royal  Exchequer,  and  thence  iflued  out  to  the  refpec- 
tive  offices  of  payment.  Iffiis  revenue  the  people  can 
never  lefufe  to  raife,  becaufe  it  is  made  perpetual  by  aa 
“  of  Parliament:  which  alfo,  when  w’cll  confidered,  wil 
appear  to  be  a  trufl  of  great  delicacy  and  high  impor- 

tance. _ Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  1  think  it  is 

clear,  that  whatever  may  have  become  of  the  7io7ninal^ 
cc  ^he  r^’al  power  of  the  crown  has  not  been  too  far  weak¬ 
en  ened^by  any  tranfadVions  in  the  laft  century  Much 
is  indeed  given  up;  but  much  is  alfo  acquired.  1  he 
ftern  commands  of  prerogative  have  yielded  to 
‘‘  milder  voice  of  influence;  the  flavifh  and  exploded  doc- 
^  trii-e  of  non-refiflance  has  given  way  to  a  military  efla- 
‘  blifliment  by  law;  and  to  the  difule  of  parliaments  has 
fucceeded  a  parliamentary  trufl  of  an  immenfe  perpe- 
tual  revenue.  When,  indeed,  by  the  free  t)pcrations^of 


(  51  ) 

ing  tht  Sinking  Fund,  by  pains  and  penalties  • 
and  making  all  encroachments  upon  it  no 
lets  TREASON  than  an  attempt  to  kill*  the 

‘‘the  Sinking  Fund,  our  National  Debts  (hall  be  Jef- 
fened;  when  the  pofture  of  foreign  affairs,  and  the  u„ 

‘‘  verfal  introduc^on  of  a  well-planned  and  natiZl 
ir.ilitia,  v\ill  fluffier  our  formidable  army  to  be  thinned 

t^xesTlrbl  of  all)  our 

taxes  fhall  be  gradually  reduced  ;  this  adventitious 

“  povver  of  the  crovva  will  flovvly  and  imperceptibly  di- 

«  imperceptibly  arofe.  But  till 

will  be  our  efpecial  duty,  as  good 
fubjeas  and  good  Englifltmen,  ro  reverence  the  croTn 

<C  againft  corrupt  and  fervile  influence 

front  thoie  who  are  intrufted  with  it’s  authority;  to  be 

^  ^  •  •  I  ^  and  yet  independent ;  and 

above  every  thing  to  hope  that  we  may  long,  very  ong 

‘‘  continue  to  be  governed  by  a  fovereign,^  who^n  aU 

«  ‘u  Pcrfonally  proceeded  from 

‘‘  h.mfelf,  hath  manifefted  the  higheft  venerati.  n  for  the 
free  conftitution  of  Britain;  hath  already  in  more  than 
one  triftan^ce  remarkably  ftrengtheiied  it’s  outworks : 
and  will  therefore  never  harbour  a  thought  or  adopt  a  '' 

perDafion,  in  any  the  remoteft  degree  detrimental  to 
public  liberty.” 

I  hope  I  fhall  be  excufed  the  length  of  this  ci notation. 

It  confirms  fo  muchyf  what  I  have  (aid,  and  contains  an 
admonition  to  the  kingdom  of  fuch  moment,  that  1  could 

not  prevail  on  myfelf  to  fupprefs  any  part  of  it. - If  any 

one  would  know  more  of  the  evil  of  the  National  Debt 
let  him  confult  Mr.  Hume’s  Effay  on  this  fubjed,  in  his 
J  olitical  Eiiays;  and  to  crown  all,  let  him  add  the  faft 
above  mentioned;  or  the  quick  progrefs  it  is  making 

towards  annihilating  us  by  depopulation. - With  re- 

fpedt  to  this  laft  evil,  however,  1  muff  acknowledcre, 
that,  when  united  to  fome  of  the  other  evils  infepa- 
Mble  from  the  National  Debt,  it  lofes  much  of  its  nature. 
Eor,  when  liberty  is  leaving  a  kingdom,  it  becomes  of 
|els  cpnfequence  how  foon  it  is  reduced  to  nothino-. 

H  2  King ; 


<c 


rfiiwna  ,.  M  i 


/ 


(  52  ) 

King ;  I  fliould  be  confcious  of  making  a 
very  vain  propofal.  For  fuch  a  fecurity 
would  be  only  tbe  fecurity  of  law  ;  and  this 
has  been  already  given  without  eiTed.  Par- 
liaments  can  give  no  defence  again  ft  thera- 
felves.  Nor  is  there  any  thing  that  one  Parr 
liament  can  do,  which  a  fucceeding  Par¬ 
liament,  or  even  the  fame  Parliament,  may 
not  wido. — ^ — This,  however,  is  an  objedion 
which  our  Statefmen  cannot  make  with  any 
decency;  becaufe  it  implies  a  confcffion, 
that  they  muft  not  be  expeded  to  continue 

faithful  "  to  the  public  intereft.^ - And  if 

this  be  indeed  true ;  if  a  fucceffion  of  fuch 
wife  and  honeft  adminiftrations  is  impoffible, 
as  is  neceffary  to  execute  a  plan  that  requires 
fteadinefs  of  counfel  for  a  courfe  of  years ; 
and  if,  on  this  account,  the  kingdom  muft 
defpair  of  ever  feeing  the  Sinking  Fund 
permanently  and  efficacioufly  reftored  ^  • 

then,  in  the  name  of  juftice  and  humanity, 
let  it  be  expunged  from  our  public 
accounts;  and  let  us  not  be  any  longer 
mocked  vdth  the  shadow  of  an  invaluable 
bleffinu,  once  folemnly  promiled  us;  but 
whichht  feems,  for  want  of  public  virtue, 

we  can  tzever  enjoy.  _  ,  .  ^  i  •  n. 

But  it  is  time  to  difmifs  this  fubject. 

I  have  written  freely  the  fentiments  of  ray 
heart ;  and  the  public  is  now  left  to  judge. 

_ _ With  the  defire,  but  not  with  much  tope 

of  fuccefs,  I  have  ftepped  forth  to  convey 

3 


(  53  ) 

iny  country  an  information,  which  all  who 
will  confidcr  it  muft  fee  to  be  of  gieat  im¬ 
portance.  Should  it  be  entirely  negleded, 
the  pain  I  thall  feel  will  not  be  on  my  own 
account.  1  know  I  have  meant  to  ad  the 
part  of  a  good  citizen ;  and  I  fhall  return  to 
pbfeurity  and  filence,  fatisfied  with  this  re- 
hexion ;  and  happy  in  the  confeioufnefs  of 

wanting  nothing  this  world  can  give  me, 

* 


A  P  P  E  N 


* 


■■r  .-r, 


<7^- 


i  . 


i 


f  .if 


'■‘i,n<^'ia  ri 
.  :■ 


■O- 


:n  li 


•  r 


>  Tr.  jj'  '  •  ‘  ^ 


'  •*  »•  i .  >  i.  i  > 


>  -V  ».  i4. 


1  '/Vr; 


,  >  •>  f  ^  ^ 


j  -^7 r 


.  '  .  *  *"  '  Y ^nu  7:Uv3  ' 

■;  ^  V  i-':-  n:  7Pqii/i'  r,r.\  r  * 

f  f  •.aX,  1.  -  I  K 

r-t''y  '  -p  V  t 

'  ‘  ^  ■  //  ?•  1-  .  v  J  •  ^  •  .  M  , 


•  •  f 

t  ».  ^  i  J  i  J  T  ■  >  '^'  ‘  ■ 

»  *"»*•(* 


y  • » 


i 


I  <* 


ST- .  4- 


i  i|  ^ 


^•ws 


• '  -s 


■*  ■'  'I  •  ''-'I 


'  it 


>'  />»■■- 


.  ^ 


iiv . 


'. 't 


T  it. 


V.1 


,  T 


J 


V  ^*t  .i 


4.1k 


.  V  .  . 


■r.% 


•>  - 


/  ■ 


•V»  •'•r 


-’ll'  vi.  *.  '  r  A-  i'-  '^'''  :  ■  I 


•  '  t 

4.  •'  '.■  '  ■» 

•,k’ 


V  'V  •,  '■  .  ,k.  -i 

•  -  <v  >  .  t*-'- 


1 


ly  .t 


^  y  t 


>•  -V  '  ( 

4 


>  ^ 


( 


ft .  t  0^ 

I  * 


»  t 


tLiiiSi^kmA 


'h  '%t 


A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X. 

Note  (A).  See  Page  5. 

TABLE  1. 

Shewing  the  Prosrefs  of  a  Fund  of  200,000/.  per  Jnnum^ 
applied  unalienably  to  the  Payment  of  public  Debts, 


;  1 


1 

Yrs.  r. 
g' 

1 

roduce  of  iheri 
und  at  the  be*  p: 
nning  of  every  gi 
tar.  y 

otai  of  debts  j 

lid  at  the  be-  j, 
nning  of  every  | 
ear. 

,Pr( 

y.  iFU 

ifrs.  1 

gm 

ye? 

1 

£■ 

200,000 
Add  10,000 

£■ 

0.200,000 

12 

2 

210,000 
Add  10,500 

0.410,000 

13 

3 

220,500 
Add  11,025 

0.630,500 

H 

4 

■ 

2315525 

Add  11,576 

0.862,025 

15 

&c. 

5 

243,101 

12,155 

1.105,126 

- 

30 

&c. 

6 

255,256 

12,763 

1.360,382 

50 

&c. 

1 

1  " 

:  7 

268,019 

13,401 

1.628,401 

£. 

8 

281,420 

14,071 

1.909,821 

86 

1  ^ 

295,491 

U,775 

2.205,312 

1 

he. 

1C 

310,266 

J555'3 

2.515,578 

i  100 

1 1 

325.779 

16,28c 

2.841.357 

) 

■  1 

Total  ot  debts  paid] 

at  the  beginning 


34.2, o&b 

i7>io3 


359>i7i 

17^959 


377^130 

18,856 


0.395,986 
&c. 


£. 

3.i«3.425 


3.542,596 


3.919,726 


4.3I5>7J2 

&c. 


0.823,227 


2.184,266 


5-795.509 


12.650,870 


13.287,769 

41.869,600 


ii7.705>702 


13-283, 414 


25.047,858 


261.668,284 


274'95i5^9^ 


522.005,020 


(■  . 

h 


e: 


wr-iCV 


•PvT 


(  56  ) 

•I  ^  , 

N.  B.  The  whole  profit,-  in  i6o  years,  by  this 

iund,  fuppofing  it  alienated  every  year,  to  avoid 

borrowing  at  5  per  cent,  Ample  intereft  fums  equal 

to  Its  produce,  would  be  69.500,000/.  includina 

tne  principal  funis  borrowed,  together  with  all  their 
interefts. 

The  WHOLE  PROFIT  by  it,  if  never  alienated, 
would.  It  appears,  be,  in  the  fame  time,  522  millions. 
1  he  COMPLETE  LOSS,  therefore,  by  alienation, 
would  be  452  millions  and  a  half.  In  pao-e  7  k 
IS  fliewn,  that,  in  86  years,  the  lofs  would ’be 
208.250,000/.  And  this  forms  the  ftriifteft  de- 
monftration,  that,  while  there  is  a  poflibility  of 
avoiding  alienation,  by  borrowing  money  at  fimplc 
mtereft,  it  muft  be,  in  the  highefi  degree,  perni¬ 
cious  to  a  ftate  not  to  do  it.  But  this  will  be  far¬ 
ther  explained  in  the  following  notes. 


Note 


(  57  ) 


Note  (B).  See  Page  12. 


I  Here  fuppofe  the  operation  of  the  fund  to  be¬ 
gin  at  Midfummer,  1717?  and  to  be  applied 
from  that  time  to  Midfummer,  1727,  to  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  debts  bearing  5  per  centi  intereft.  From 
1727  to  1756^  1  fuppofe  it  applied  to  the  payment 
of  debts  bearing  4  per  cent,  intereft  *,  and  from. 
1756  to  Midfummer  1772,  **0  the  payment  of 
debts  bearing  3  per  cent,  intereit.  1  further  fuppofe 
the  produce  of  the  fund  to  have  been,  from  the 
firff,  1,200^000  per  dnn, - In  the  firft  of  thefc 


periods,  fuch  a  fund,  unalienably  applied,  would 
have  paid  off  17  millions.  In  the  lecond  period, 
or  the  next  29  years,  it  would  have  paid  off  126 
millions.  And  in  the  laft  16  years,  it  would  have 
paid  off  129  millions.  In  all  then,  255  millions 
might  have  been  paid  ^  or  1 1 5  millions  more  than 
our  prefent  debt; 

In  this  calculation  no  account  is  taken  of  the 
benefit  derived  from  the  alienations  of  the  Sinking 
Fund,  Let  thefe  be  fiippofed  to  have  been  equi¬ 
valent  to  a  million  per  Ann,  which  the  public  muft 
have  otherwife  borrowed,  arid  paid  intereft  for,  at 
per  cent,  from  Midluminer,  1733,  Midfum¬ 
mer,  J771. - By  the  alienation  in  1733,  the 


public  would  have  been  faved  a  million,  together 
with  38  annual  payments  of  intereft  money.  In 
1734,  1735,  1736,  &c;  it  would  have  been  faved 
the  fame  funi,  together  with  27,  26,  25,  &c.  an¬ 
imal  payments  of  intereft  moriey.  It  may  be  eafily 
found,  that  all  thefe  favings  added  together,  will 
amount  nearly  to  68  millions.  And  this  fum  I 
jreckon  much  more  than  equivalent  to  the  profits 

I  we 


'T-J 


Tis*-- 


V' 


(  J-S  ) 

we  have  made  by  alienations.  But  it  has  appeared  - 
that,  had  there  been  no  alienations,  255  millions 
would  have  been  paid  off.  Subtract:  then,  from 
this  lum,  68  millions,  and  alio  the  prefent  debt, 
eftimated  at  140  millions  *,  and  the  remainder,  or 
47  millions,  will  be  the  Surplus,  which  the  pub¬ 
lic  muff  have  been  now  poffeffed  of,  after  dilcharg- 
ing,  not  only  all  the  prefent  debts,  but  likewife, 
alt  the  extraordinary  expences^  including  inter  eft  monies^ 
v;hich  mult  have  been  incurred  by  avoidino-  alien¬ 
ations.  ^ 

Some  will  probably  think,  that  this  furplus 
ought  to  be  further  dimini ffed  by  the  amount  of 
the  debts  that  have  been  aftually  paid  off.  1  have 
luppofed  thefe  about  20  millions,  but  let  them  be 
27  millions  ;  and  ftill  there  will  be  left  a  furplus 
of  20  millions. 

In  fhort.  Let  any  one  calculate  on  any  fuppo- 
fitions  that  he  may  think  neareft  to  the  truth  ;  and 
he  will  find  the  Ioffes,  occafioned  by  the  dlverfions 
which  have  been  made  of  the  Sinking  Fund^  to  be 
at  leaft  equal  to  the  whole  of  our  prefent  debts  ^ 
Ioffes,  1  niuft  add,  which  there  could  be  no  occa- 
fion  for  incurring;  which  have  had  no  advantages 
ro  balance  them  ;  and  which  I  have  fliewn,  in  the 
laft  part  of  this  pamphlet,  to  haye  been  brought 
upon  us,  in  oppofition  to  the  authority  of  an  ex- 
prefs  law. 

I  have  luppofed  the  income  of  the  finking  fund 
to  have  been  equivalent  to  i. 200,000/.  per  ann. 
from  the  year  when  it  was  firft  effabliihed.  It  is 
of  no  particular  confequence,  whether  this  fuppo- 
fitionj^  exactly  right  or  not.  The  probability 
ieems  to  be,  that  it  falls  Ihort  of  the  truth  ;  for  it 
ihould  be  remembered,  that  the  Sinking  Fund  has 
been  plundered  in  more  ways  than  by  taking  trona 
it  grofs  fums^ — iff.  Many  ikvings  have  been  kept 
i  "  *  '  from 


(  59  ) 

from  It,  which  fliould  have  been  brought  into  it- 
And  2dly,  d  he  income  of  it  has,  in  many  inftances, 
been  charged  with 'the  payment  of  the  intereft  of 
new  loans.  Had  no  alienations  of  any  kind  been 
pradifed,  and  the  intention  of  the  law  lacredly  ob- 
•ierved,  its  income  would  have  been  confiderablv 
greater  than  it  has  been,  and  the  furplus  we  flioiiid 
have  been  now  poflefied  of,  after  paying  all  our 
debts,  would  have  been  greater  than  can  well  be 
eftimated.  What  its  aftual  income  has  been,  will 
appear  from  the  following  account. 

Medium  of  the  annual  produce  of  the  Sinking  Fund^ 
from  its  commencement, 

to  1726  —  —  c.577,614 

From  1727  to  1736,  both  inclufive  1.132,251 
1737  to  1746  —  —  1.062,170 

1747  to  1756  —  —  1.356,578 

i757;to  1766  —  —  2.059,406 

The  chief  reafon  of  the  increafe  after  the  years 
1726  and  1756,  was  the  redudions  of  intereft 
which  then  took  place. 


I  2 


Note 


Note  (C.)  See  Page  13. 


Every  one  who  has  attended  to  my  reafon- 
ings,  muft  fee,  that  when  a  ftate  borrows  to 
avoid  alienating,  I  always  fuppofe  the  interefts  of 
the  fums  borrowed  to  be  paid  either  by  a  new  tax, 
or  by  creating  fome  new  faving.  If  the  interefts 
of  the  fums  borrowed  are  taken  from  the  Sinking 
Fund,  its  efficacy  will  be  as  effeaually  deftroyed, 
as  if  thofe  fums  themfelves  had  been  taken  from 
it ;  the  powers  of  the  fund  depending  entirely  on 
the  interefts  difengaged  from  time  to  time  being 
fuffered  to  remain  there,  in  order  to  carry  intereft 
by  being  employed  in  paying  debts,  and  confe- 
quently  in  difengaging/iir/l>^r  interefts. 

The  two  following  tables  will,  I  hope,  explain 
this  fufficiently. 


6i 


TABLE  11. 


I 

'if 


4  ■ 


Shewing  the  Progrefs  of  two  Funds;  one  alienated 

O  O  ' 

every  Year,  by  taking  from  it  gross  Sums  equal 
to  its  Produce  :  And  the  other  unalienable. 


I. 

Yrs. 

II. 

Annual  pro¬ 
duce  of  the 
Fund. 

111. 

Debts  paid 
off  bearing 
4  per  cent, 
intereft. 

IV. 

Gain  by  Ali¬ 
enation,  be¬ 
ing  the  totals, 
to  the  beginning 
of  every  year,  of 
the  fums  alienat¬ 
ed,  together  with 
the  totals  of  the 
intereft s  at  4  per 
cent,  which  muft: 
have  been  paid 
for  thofe  fums, 
had  they  been 
borrowed. 

V. 

GwMn  by  Non- 
Ac  ien  AT  ION, 
being  the  totals  of 
the  debts  paid  off 
at  the  beginning 
of  every  >ear,  in 
confequence  cf  a- 
voiding  alienation 

Vi. 

Balance,  atl 
the  beginning  of, 
every  year,  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  non- alie¬ 
nation,  being  the 
excefs  of  the 
numbers  in  co¬ 
lumn  V.  above 
thofe  in  column 
IV. 

1 

£■ 

1 .000,000 

1 .000,000 

1 .000,000 

C- 

0.000,000 

2 

1 .000,000 

m  %  S  % 

2,040,000 

2.040,000 

0.000,000 

3 

1.000,000 

•  »  •  • 

3. 120,000 

3  121,600 

0.001 ,6''o 

4 

i  .000,000 

•  •  •  • 

4.240,000 

4.246,^64 

G. 006,464 

5 

1 .000,000 

•  •  •  • 

5.400,000 

5'4>i5,323 

0.016,323 

6 

I  .000,000 

•  •  • 

6.600,000 

6.632,975 

0.032,975 

7 

1 .000,000 

•  •  •  ♦ 

7.840,000 

7.898,294 

0.058,2941 

8 

1 .000,000 

•  •  •  • 

9.  I  20,000 

9.2  14,226 

0.094,226 

9 

1 .000,000 

•  •  •  • 

10.440,000 

10.582,795 

0.142,795; 

!0 

1.000,000 

•  •  •  * 

I  1 .800,000 

12.006,107 

0.206,107, 

&C. 

5^ 

1.000,000 

•  •  •  • 

I  17.600,000 

199.805,540 

82.205,540’, 

70 

1 .000,000 

*  •  •  • 

166.600,000 

364.290,459 

197.690,459 

100 

1 .000,000 

•  •  •  • 

2q3  000,000 

I  237-623,700 

939.623,700; 

TABLE 


TABLE 


III. 


Shewing  the  Progrefs  cf  two  Funds ;  one  alienated 
every  Year,  by  taking  from  it  the  interefes  at  4 
pen  cent,  ot  grofs  Sums,  equal  to  its  Produce  i 
And  the  other  unalienable. 


'1. 

Yrs. 

li. 

Annual  pro¬ 
duce  of  the 
fund. 

lit. 

Ueets  paic 
off  bearing  4 
per  cent,  in- 
tereft. 

iV. 

Gan  by  the 
fund  to  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  every 
year,  being  the 
totalsotthefums 
paid  off,  together 
with  the  totals 
of  the  interefls 
taken  from  the 
fund  to  avoid  cre¬ 
ating  new  taxes. 

V. 

1  Gain,  to  the 
!  beginning  of  e- 
.  very  year,  by 
i  non-aJienation, 

VI. 

Balance  at 
the  beginning  of 
every  year,  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  non-alie¬ 
nation,  being  the 
difTcrence  be¬ 

tween  the  num¬ 
bers  in  column 
IV.  and  V. 

f 

L- 

e- 

4- 

J 

* 

I  •.  000,000 

1.000,00c 

1,000,000 

1 .000,000 

0.000,000 

i  .000,000 

I  000,000 

2. 040. coo 

2.040,000 

0,000,000 

3 

1  000,000 

1 .000,000 

3.1 20.000 

3.  I  2  I  ,600 

0.001,600 

4 

1  .000,000 

1  .000,000 

4.240,000 

4.246  464 

0.006,464 

5 

I  .OCO,OOC 

1 .000,000 

5.400,000 

5.416,323 

0.016,323 

6 

1 .000,000 

i  .000,000 

6.600,000 

6.632  gy; 

0.032,975 

/ 

1.000,000 

I  000,000 

7.840,000 

7.898,294 

0.058,294 

8 

1 

1 .000,000 

{  .000,000 

9.  I  20,000 

9.214,226 

0.094,226 

9l 

I  .000,000 

!  .OCO5OOO 

10.440.000 

10. 582,793 

0.142,795 

10 

1 .000,000 

'  .000,000 

I  1 .800,000 

I  2.006, 1 07 

0.206,  107 

<‘^c. 

&c. 

&c. 

&c. 

&c.' 

1. 000,000 

1  .000,000 

1 17.600,000 

ig9.f!o5,54o 

82.203,540 

VC. 

c^C. 

&c. 

&c. 

Sec. 

&c. 

70 

{  000,000 

/  .000,000' 

166.600,000  ! 

- — '■  - - 

364.290,4  39 

197-690,4^9  1 

The  numbers  in  the  5th  columns  of  thefe  Tables, 
are  calculated  in  the  iame  manner  with  the  numbers 
in  the  third  columns  of  Tabic  I.  page  55:  and  the 
numbers  in  the  fourth  columns,  in  the  manner  ex¬ 
plained 


(  ^3  ) 

plained  in  page  6.  The  former  numbers  exhibit  the 
amount  of  a  million  per  ami.  bearing  4  per  cert, 
COMPOUND  intereft;  and  the  latter  numbers  exhi¬ 
bit  the  amount  of  the  fame  annual  lum  bearing 
per  cent,  simple  intereft.  It  appears,  therefore, 
undeniably,  from  thefe  Tables,  that  the  fuperior 
efficacy  of  an  unalienable  fund,,  depends  on  the  im¬ 
provement  of  money  in  it  at  compound  intereft ; 
and  that  to  divert  the  produce  of  a  fund,  appro¬ 
priated  to  the  payment  of  debts,  in  order  to  avoid 
making  new  loans,  and  providing  new  favings  for 
paying  the  intereft  of  thofe  loans,  is  the  very  fame 
with  taking  money  from  compound  intereft,  in  order 

to  put  it  out  xo  fimple  intereft. - It  appears,  like- 

wile,  that  the  lolTes  arifing  from  hence,  though  at 
firft  fmall,  foon  become  very  great ;  and  that, 
confequently,  the  reafon  which  has  been  ufed  to 
juftify  this  pradtice,  is,  indeed,  what  I  have  repre- 
fented  it,  a  dangerous  Sophism.  In  no  loner 
time,  it  will  probably,  it  no  vigorous  meafures  afe, 
foon  entered  into,  coft  this  nation  all  the  troubles' 
of  a  public  bankruptcy. 

It  may  deferve  to  be  mentioned,  that  the  fums 
fuppofed  to  be  borrowed  every  year  in  conlequence 
of  non-alienation,  being  balanced  by  equal  fums 
paid  every  year ;  the  total  of  thefe  fums,  to  the 
beginning  of  every  year,  may  be  dedudled  from 
the  fums  in  the  4th  and  5th  columns*,  and  there 
will  remain  in  the  4th  column,  the  produce  of  all 
the  taxes  impofed  to  pay  off  the  debts  in  the  5th 

column. - Thus  from  117.600,000/.  in  the  4th 

column,  and  alfo  from  199.805,540/.  in  the  5th 
column,  dedudl  56  millions,  and  the  remainders 
will  (hew,  that  at  the  expence  of  taxes  or  affefi- 
ments,  all  the  payments  of  which  would,  in  56 
years,  make  61.600,000/.  the  public  would  pay 
pff  143.805.540/.  Or,  (which  comes  to  the 

famiCj 


I 


(  64  ) 

fame)  that  at  the  expence  of  taxes,  beginning 
with  40,000/.  per  ann.  and  increafing  gradually 
till  the  laft  annual  payment  became  2.200,000/; 
the  public  might  cafe  itfelf,  at  the  end  of  55 
years,  not  only  of  all  thefe  extraordinary  taxes,  but 
alfo  of^  other  taxes  to  the  amount  of  5.752,000.^. 

- The  Sinkwg  Fund  then,  had  its  income  from* 

the  firfl:  been  only  a  million  per  ann.  might,  by 
this  time,  befides  paying  off  a  fum  equat  to  the 
whole  prefent  amount  of  the  national  debt,  have 
paid  otF  56  millions  principal  money  borrowed  to 
avoid  alienation  ;  and  alfo,  a  part  of  61.600,000/. 
contributed  by  the  public  from  time  to  time  to 
pay  the  intereft  of  the  money  borrowed.  Has  not 
then  alienation  been  a  pernicious  meafure  ?  Can  it 
be  poffible,  that  an  enlightened  kingdom,  v/ith 
ruin  before  it  as  the  confequence,  fhould  go  on 
with  fuch  a  meafure  ^ 

Thefe  Tables  exhibit  only  the  efftcls  of  conflant 
alienations.  If  thele  are  pernicious,  partial  alien¬ 
ations  muft  be  alio  pernicious.  In  what  deo'ree 
they  are  fo,  will  appear  in  the  next  note.  ° 

It  is  necelTary  I  fhotild  obferve  farther,  with  re- 
fped  to  thefe  Tables,  that  the  4th  column  in 
Table  II.  fiiews  exaftly  the  whole  lofs  the  public 
would  fuftain,  by  borrowing  a  million  annually  at 
4  per  cent.,  including  the  whole  produce  of  etery  tax 
for  faying  the  intcrejl  of  every  loan  ;  and  column,  tlie 
5th  lliews  the  gain  arifing  from  employing  that 
annual  fum  in  the  payment  of  debts  bearing  the 
fame  intereft.  Thefe  Tables,  therefore,  explain 
and  demonllrate  the  obfervations  in  p.age  16  and 

17- 


Were 


(  155  ) 

Were  it  indifrcrenr,  when  any  fums  are  wanted, 
whether  they  are  procured  by  new  loans  charcred 
on  new  taxes,  or  by  alienating  an  appropriated 
fund,  the  gain  by  a  fund  always  alienated  for  cur¬ 
rent  fervices,  would  be  the  fame,  in  every  period 
of  its  progrefs,  with  the  gain  by  an  equal  fund 
never  alienated  ;  and  confequenfly  the  gain  by  a 
million  fpent  annually  on  current  fervices,  would 
(by  column  5,  Table  II.)  be  equivalent,  in  a  hun¬ 
dred  years,  to  1257  triiUions  :  And  the  gain  by  a 
fenny  fpent  at  our  Saviour’s  birth,  equivalent  to 
150  millions  of  earths,  all  folid  gold  ;  for  to  this 
fum  (as  obferved  in  page  19.)  would  a  penny, 
bearing  ^  fer  cent,  iritereft,  in  an  unalienable  fund, 
have  by  this  time  amounted. 

Upon  the  whole.  It  is  not  in  my  powder  to 
imagine  more  than  the.  following  cafes,  in  which 
alienations  can  be  excufable.  ift.  After  a  fund 
has  operated  its  full  time,  it  may  be  right  to  em¬ 
ploy  it  in  defraying  the  expences  of  any  fervices 
that  may  happen  tl?en  to  be  necefiary.  For  exam¬ 
ple.  Our  Sinking  Fund^  had  it  been  preferved 
from  alienation,  would,  in  the  prefent  year,  have 
extinguilhed  all  our  debts,  and  given  the  public 
the  command  of  an  income  ot  at  leaf!;  feven  or 
eight  millions  per  ann.  And,  had  a  war  become 
now  unavoidable,  no  inconveniences  could  have 
arifen  from  employing  this  income  in  bearing  the 
expences  of  the  war.  This  would  have  enabled 
the  kingdom  to  carry  it  on  without  making  any 
addition 'to  its  incumbrances;  and  when  a  peace 
came,  all  the  perpetual  taxes  might  be  abolifhed  : 
and  the  eftablifhment  of  a  fmall  new^  fund,  at  the 
commencentent  of  any  fubfequent  war,  would  be 
fufficient  for  ever  to  keep  the  public  debts  within 
the  bounds  of  fafety.  » 


K 


Secondly. 


(  66  ) 

Secondly.  The  alienation  of  a  fund  is  excuf- 
able,  when  a  ftate  cannot  borrow  money  at  any 
rate  of  fimple  intereft ;  or,  which  comes  to  the 
fame,  when  no  taxes  or  favings  can  be  procured 
for  paying  the  intereft  of  new  loans,  but  fuch  as 
either  neceflarily  mujl^  or  certainly  would  have  been 
brought  into  the  fund,  and  improved  there  at  com¬ 
pound  intereft,  whether  there  had  been  any  new 

loans  or  not. - Every  one  muft  fee,  that  this  is  a 

cafe  which  cannot  happen  while  a  ftate  has  the  power 
of  creating  taxes  or  favings,  that  neither  mujl^  nor 
probably  would  have  been  created,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  emergency  that  occafions  them. — It  may, 
indeed,  be  faid  concerning  every  tax  or  faving, 
created  to  avoid  alienating  a  fund,  that  it  might  at 
that  time  have  been  created,  and  likewife  brought 
into  the  fund,  though  the  realon  for  creating  it 
had  not  exifted.  But  if,  though  it  mighty  it  either 
certainly  or  probably  would  not,  the  Ioffes  by  alie¬ 
nation  remain  the  fame. - It  is  very  abfurd  to 

aflert  concerning  any  meafure,  that  it  would  have 
been  taken,  though  the  reafon  for  it  had  not  ex¬ 
ifted.  The  contrary  may  be  always  depended 
upon.  With  refpeeft  to  our  own  government  in 
particular,  we  know,  that  it  has  never  yet,  with 
any  permanency,  improved  money  at  compound 
intereft.  Nor  has  there  been  ever  a  time,  when  it 
could  have  been  faid  with  truth,  that,  had  it  avoided 
alienation,  the  very  tax  ncceffary  in  that  cafe  to  pay 
the  intereft  of  the  furn  which  muft  have  been  bor¬ 
rowed,  would  have  been  provided,  and  made  a 
part  of  an  unalienable  fund.  But  this  leads  me  to 
mention 

Thirdly,  That  the  alienation  of  a  fund  would 
be  excufable,  were  a  new  tax  or  laving,  producing 
the  intereft  of  the  fum  alienated,  always  created, 
and  immediately  brought  into  the  fund,  to  be  im- 
4  proved 


(  6;  ) 

proved  there  in  the  fame  manner  with  the  reft  of 
us  produce.— —This  is,  likewife,  a  cafe  that  has 
never  happened  in  this  kingdom,  alienations  hav¬ 
ing  been  praclned  among  us,  on  ftirpofe  to  avoid 
new  taxes. 

It  deleryes  to  be  here  mentioned,  that  a  wife 
ftate  will,  it  poffible,  put  even  fuch  alienatibns  as 
thele  out  or  the  power  of  the  managers  of  its  af¬ 
fairs  for,  the  facility  of  obtaining  money  in  this 
way,  might  tempt  to  alienation,  when  ferviccs  ab- 
lolutely  neceftary  did  not  call  for  money;  and  the 
new  taxes  neceftary  to  replace  the  intereft  of  the 
lums  alienated,  might  often  be  poftponed,  or  prove 
dcncient  •,  in  all  which  cafes,  iofies  would  be  in¬ 
curred,  and  the  efficiency  of  a  fund  .might  be  fo 
much  leffened,  as  to  be  rendered  ufelefs. 

Laftly.  Alienations  might  be  juftified,  were  a 
kingdom  got  to  its  utmoft  limit  in  taxation,  and 
io  ts-V  cxlmuil'cd  tis  to  be  inccip3.ble  of  ma,king  aiiv 
new  fayings  for  paying  the  intereft  of  new  loans. 

CircuiTiftsnccs,  nccclTiry  iisving  no  Iciw^  it 
might  be  right  to  take  from  a  fund,  any  fums 
which  the  lalvation  of  the  kingdom  required.  But 
this,  likewife,  is  a  cafe  that  cannot  be  our  own,  till 
all  the  reduftions  poffible  have  been  made  in  the 
number  of  places  and  penfions,  in  the  pay  of  the 
great  officers  of  ftate,  and  in  the  colledion  and 

expenditure  of  the  revenue. - Perhaps,  indeed, 

we  cannot  go  much  further  in  taxatmi.  An  addi¬ 
tion  to  an  old  tax,  might  deftroy  its  own  effeft  by 
diminifhing  confumption.  The  impofidon  of  a 
new  tax  might  alfo  deftroy  its  own  efted:  by  claffi- 
ing  with  Ibme  old  tax.  And  the  effect  of  a  general 
prodvMhe  increafe  of  taxes,  could  it  be  accom- 
plifhed,  would  moft  probably  deftroy  its  own 
fource  by  accelerating  depopulation.-^ — Some  think 
this  not  to  be  a  very  wrong  account  of  our  prefent 

K  2  ftate 


d 


(  68  ) 

ftatc  with  refpedt  to  taxation.  But  I  hppe  they 
are  miftaken. 

It  gives  me  much  concern  to  be  obliged  to  be 
fo  minute  and  tedious  as  I  have  been  in  this  note. 
But  the  common  and  ftrong  prejudices  in  favour 
of  alienations,  and  the- objedlions  of  fome  very  re- 
fpeftable  perfons,  have  convinced  me,  that  there 
is  more  occafion  for  this  minutenefs  than  I  once 
imagined ;  and  that,  though  fupported  by  de- 
monftration,  I  ought  not  to  omit  even  the  argument 
taken  from  the  authority  of  thofe  who  have  writ 
before  me  on  this  fubjeft.  It  is  for  this  reafon, 
that  I  have,  with  great  reluftance,  crouded  this 
Appendix  with  the  extradls  which  are-p  follow 
the  next  note. 


I 

) 


) 


\ 

t  V 

I  ‘ 


-  ^ 


(  69  ) 


Note  (D).  See  Page  14. 

TABLE  IV, 

Shewing  the  whole  EfFcft,  in  56  Years,  of  a  Fund 
yielding  a  Million  per  Ann.  appropriated  to  the 
Payment  of  Debts  bearing  4  per  cent.  Intereft, 
but  alienated  every  other  Year. 


Midfum- 

iper. 

Produce  of  the 
fund  at  Mid- 
fummer  every 
year. 

Total  of  the  debts 
jaid  from  Mid¬ 
summer,  1717,  to 
the  beginning  of 
every  year. 

Sums  alienated 
every  other 

year. 

Expence  faved  | 
by  alienation, 
being  the  fum 
alienated,  toge¬ 
ther  with  all  its 
interefts  from 
the  year  of  alie¬ 
nation,  to  Mid- 
fummer,  1^771* 

1. 

£■ 

£- 

1717 

I.OOO5OOO 

1.000,00c 

• 

18 

I.O4O5OOO 

1.000,000 

uo40,ooo 

3.244,800 

19 

I.O4O5OOC 

2.040,000 

20 

I.08I560O 

2.040,000 

1.08 1,600 

3.288,064 

21 

I.08I560O 

3.121,600 

22 

1.124,864 

3.121,600 

1.124,864 

3.329,470 

23 

1.124,864 

4.246,464 

24 

1.169,858 

4.246,464 

1.169,858 

3.369,176- 

25 

1.169,858 

5.416,322 

26 

1.216,652 

5.416,322 

1.216,652 

3.406,622 

27 

1.216,652 

6-632,975 

28 

1.265,319 

6-632,975 

1.265,319 

3.441,635 

29 

1.265,319 

7.898,294 

•  •  •  •  •  ■ 

•  •  •  •  •  • 

30 

i-3>:  5^931 

7.898,294 

i-3i5»93> 

3.474,048 

31 

i-3i5>93i 

9.214,226 

32 

1.368,569 

9.214,226 

1.368,565 

3-503>507 

33 

1.368,569 

10.582,795 

34 

*•423^311 

10.582,795 

1.423,311 

3-529’795 

35 

1.423,311 

12.006,10) 

table 


IV.  Continued. 


Mldf. 


Produce  of  the 


year. 


every  year. 


1736  1.480,244 


37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 


12.006,107 


^•539A54 

*-539>454 
1.601,032 
1.601,032 
1.665,073 
1.665,073 
44ii.73 1,676 
451-7315676 
46 1.800,943 

47  1.800,943 

48  1.872,981 

49  1.872,981 
5©  1.947,900 

51  1.947,900 

52  2.025,816 

53  2.025,816 
542.106,849 

55  2.106,849 

56  2.191,123 


- 5  j  / 

6.626,837 
18.291,911 
18.291,911 


57  2.191,123  31.969,201 
5812.278,768  31.969,201 


59  2. -2 7 8, 7 68 


60,2.369,918  34.247,969 


21.824,531 
2 1.824,53 1 
23.697,512 
23-697,512 
25.645,412 
25-645,412 
27.671,229 
27.671,229 
29.778,078 
29.778,078 


34.247,969 


61  2.369,9 1 8 
6212.464, 715 


36.617,988 

36.617,988 


ts 

*  Sums  alienated 
0  every  other 
)f  year. 

Expence  faved 
by  alienation, 
being  the  fum 
alienated,  toge- 1 
ther  with  all  its  I 
interefts  from  I 
the  year  of  alie-  1 
nation  to  Mid- 1 
fummer  1771.  | 

7  1.480,244 

^*5395454 

t  ^  .  •  ,  •  , 

1,601,032 

*  •  •  •  t  • 

1.665,073 

*••••• 

1.731,676 

. 

3'55^y559j 

3-5715528 

*•••••  1 

3.586.303J 
•  •••••  1 
3-596,531 

.*••••  j 

3.601,8851 

1.800,943 

•  •.••• 

1.872,98 1 

•  *•••• 

1.947,900 

•  ••••» 

2.025,816 

*••••• 

2.106,849 

2.191,123 

3.601,8681 

3.596,1181 

•  •••«•  I 

3.584,136 

•  •  •  •  •  •I 

3.565,424] 

•  •  •  •  •  •  .1 

3-539, 49o| 

•  •  •  *  *  *  1 

3-505,783 

2.278,768 

3.465,718] 

2.369,918 

3.412,674 

2.464,715 

3.352,007 

TABLE  IV.  Continued. 


>  ■  "  ■  — 

Midf. 

Produce  of  the 
fund  at  Mid- 
fu miner  every 
year. 

Total  of  the  debts 
paid  from  Mid- 
fummer,  1717,  to 
the  beginning  of 
every  year. 

Sums  alienated 
every  other 
year. 

Expence  faved  1 
by  alienation, 
being  the  fum 
alienated,  toge¬ 
ther  with  all  its 
interefls  from 
the  year  of  alie-  ' 
nation  to  Mid-i 
fummer,  1771, 

1763 

2.464,715 

£• 

39.082,703 

64 

2-563,304 

39.082,703 

2.563,304 

3.281,028 

;  65 

2-563,304 

41.646,007 

66 

2.665,836 

41.646,007 

12.665,836 

3.199,001 

'  67 

2.665,836 

44.311,844 

68 

2.772,469 

44.311,844 

12.772,469 

3.105,163 

69 

2.772,469 

47.094,313 

1 

70 

2.883,368 

47-094,313 

12.883,368 

2.998,702 

1 

12.883,368 

49.977,682 

Total  of  the  expences  faved  by 

alienation,  —  —  92.701,035 

Add  the  total  of  debts  paid  —  49.977,682 


Whole  gain  by  the  fund  —  142.678,717 

Gain  by  the  fame  fund,  fuppofed 
unalienable^  being  the  total  of 
the  debts  which  it  would  have 
paid  off  —  —  —  19^-805,540 

Dedudl  the  gain  with  alienation  142.678,717 

Remains,  the  uncompenfated  lofs 
in  56  years,  by  a  fund  yielding 
a  million  'per  ann.  alienated 
every  other  year  —  ~ 


57.126,823 


(  72  ) 

It  fhould  not  be  forgotten,  that  in  this  and  the 
preceding  Tables,  the  expences  faved  by  alienation 
are  greatly  over-rated  for  the  following  reafons. 

Firft.  They  fuppofe  that  not  only  the  principal 
funis  alienated,  but  all  the  annual  interefts  of  thefc 
Aims,  are  fo  much  money  laved,  which  would  have 
been  otherwife  certainly  paid  by  the  public  : 
whereas,  there  is  all  the  reafon  poflible  for  believ¬ 
ing,  that  the  liberty  to  alienate  encourages  profu- 
Aon  ;  and  that,  had  there  been  always  a  neceffity 
for  borrowing  on  new  taxes  to  avoid  alienation, 
more  care  would  have  been  uled  in  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  the  public  finances. 

Secondly.  They  fuppofe  the  prefent  value  of 
every  annuity  to  be  equal  to  the  number  of  pay¬ 
ments  which  will  be  made  of  it.  For  inftance. 
An  annuity  of  41,600/.  payable  for  53  years,  as 
intereft  at  4  per  cent,  for  1.040,000/.  is  reckoned 
worth  53  years  purchafe;  or  2.204,800/. ;  which 
Aim  added  to  1.040,000/.  makes  3,244,800/.  the 
whole  cxpence  faved  by  alienation  in  the  year 
1718,  according  to  this  Table. 


Note 


(  73  ) 


Note  (E).  Page  36,  37. 

Extract  from  a  Proteft  In  the  Houfe  of  Lords, 
occafioncd  by  the  Alienation  of  the  Sinking 
Fund  in  1733. 

-  .Diffentient, 

TJECAUSE  the  Sinking  Fund,  being  com- 
5j  poled  of  the  furpluffes  of  funds  originally 
granted  as  a  fecurity  to  the  creditors  of  the 
public  *,  and  thefe  furpluffes  arifing  principally 
from  a  reduftion  to  4  cent,  of  the  intereft 
granted  them  for  the  moft  part  at  6  fer  cent. 
we  cannot  but  think  that  this  faving  ought  to 
be  applied,  according  to  the  moft  invjolable 
rules  of  equity,  ajid  according  to  the  knov/n 
ddign,  and  the  repeated  and  folemn  engage- 
ments  of  parliament,  to  a  gradual  payment  ot 
the  principal  to  theft  creditors  of  the  public, 
who  have  parted  with  a  third  of  their  revenue 
in  this  view,  and  upon  this  confidence.” 

BECAUSE  we  apprehend,  that  the  method  of 
applying  large  portions  of  the  Sinking  Fund  to 
the  lervice  of  the  current  year,  muft,  in  effe6f, 
perpetuate  the  debts  and  taxes  which  lie  on  the 
‘‘  nation,  and  is,  therefore,  injurious  to  the  pub- 
lie.  Had  this  whole  fund  been  ftrfttly  applied 
from  the  beginning  to  its  proper  ufc,  we  think 
it  may  be  dernonftrated,  not  only  that  much 
more  of  the  national  debt  might  have  been 
difeharged,  but  that  thoft  taxes,  which  are  moft 
‘‘  oppreffive  to  the  poor,  and  moft  prejudicial  to 
trade,  might  have  been  already  taken  off,  fince 
upwards  of  480,000/.  per  ann,  belonging,  as 

L  we 


(  74  ) 

we  conceive,  to  this  fund,  has  been  applied  to 
other  ufes.”  ^ 

^  BECAUSE  we  conceive,  that  if  the  whole 
produce  of  the  Sinking  Fund  were  not  to  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  difcharge  of  the  public  debts,  it 
would  be  much  more  for  the  eale  of  trade  and 
advantage  for  the  nation,  that  fome  of  thofe 
grievous  taxes  out  of  which  it  arifes  fhould 
ceafe,  than  that  they  lliould  be  continued  to 
fupply  the  current  fervicc  at  4  cent,  which 
might  certainly  be  fupplied  by  other  ways  at  a 
cheaper  rate.  Moft  of  thefe  taxes  were  laid 
during  the  neceffity  of  two  long  and  expenfive 
wars,  and  were  granted  only  for  terms  of  years, 
that  fo  the  principal  and  intereft  of  the  loans 
made  on  them  might  be  paid  oh  in  a  certain 
limited  time.  T.  hus,  the  nation  confented  to 
pay^  in  fome  manner  a  double  tax,  in  order  to 
avoid  the  long  and  uncertain  continuance  of 
fuch  grievous  impofitions  *,  and  according  to  the 
firfl;  defign,  many  of  them  would  have  been  very 
near  the  expiration  of  their  term  at  this  hour. 
The  wifdom  of  parliament,  indeed,  thought  fit 
afterwards  to  throw  thefe  taxes,  and  the  method 
of  difcharging  thefe  public  debts,  into  another 
form,  which  now  fubfifts.  But  we  cannot  con¬ 
ceive  that  this  was  done  with  a  view  to  continue 
our  taxes  and  debts  the  longer.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  we  are  fure  it  was  done  in  the  view  of 
difcharging  both  the  fooner ;  and  it  is  this  very 
view  which,  we  apprehend,  muft  be  fatally  dil- 
appointed,  if  the  prefent  method  of  diverting 
any  part  of  the  Sinking  Fund  from  the  pay- 

ment  of  the  public  debts  be  fuffered  to  con- 
tinned" 

BECAUSE  we  apprehend,  that  this  method 
may  create  the  utmoft  uneafinefs  in  the  minds 

4  of 


(  75  ) 

“  of  his  Majefty’s  fubjefts ;  and  may  tend,  if  not 
“  timely  prevented  by  the  wifdom  and  authority 
“  of  this  houfe,  to  diminifli  their  affedion  for  hi's 
“  perfon  and  government.  Hitherto,  whilft  they 
“  have  laboured  under  the  weight  of  taxes,  and 
“  groaned  under  the  oppreffion  of  excife  laws, 
“  the  hope  of  feeing  fpeedily  an  end  put  to  both 
“  has  been  their  foie  confolation.  But  nothing 
“  can  maintain  this  hope,  except  a  due  application 
“  of  the  entire  Sinking  Fund  to  the  difeharge  of 
“  thofe  debts,  for  the  difeharge  of  which  thefe 
“  taxes  were  given.  If  fome  parts  of  this  fund, 
“  therefore,  continue  to  be  mortgaged  off,  and 
“  other  parts  to  be  applied  to  the  current  fervice, 
“  even  in  the  midfl;  of  profound  peace,  this  hope 
“  muft  fink,  and  defpair  arife  in  its  Head,  &c. 
“  &c.” 

Bedford,  Craven,  Gainjhorough,  Wincheljea  and 
Nottingham,  Gower,  Bridgwater,  Bruce,  Car¬ 
teret,  Batburjl,  Shaftjhury,  Sunderland,  Coventry, 
’Thanet,  &c.  &c. 

The  alienation  in  the  year  1734  occafibned  a 
fecond  proteft,  and  that  in  1735,  a  long  debate ; 
but  after  this,  the  oppofition  to  alienations  de¬ 
clined,  till  at  laft  it  became  almoft  extinft  :  And 
the  like  has  happened  in  fome  other  inftances  of 
the  greateft  confequence  to  this  kingdom. 


ExtraiSs 


Extrads  from  a  Pamphlet  publillied  in  1726, 
and  entitled.  An  EJfay  on  the  public  Debts 
of  this  K.ingdo7n.  By  Sir  Nathanael 
Gould,  a  Bank  Diredor,  and  Member 
of  Parliament.  See  Page*  30,  31,  &c. 

FTER  giving  two  tables  exhibiting  the  pro- 
grels  of  a  fund  yielding  a  million  per  am, 
by  which  the  public  debts  then  exifting  would  be 
paid  off  in  28  years,  75  millions  In  35  years  and 
4  n^onths,  and  100  millions  in  40  years,  he  goes 
on  (page  40,)  in  the  following  words. 

“  From  hence  it  appears,  that  the  above  fup- 
pofed  Sinking  Fund,  in  this  manner  increafing 
by  the  addition  of  the  intercfl:  of  the  principal 
films  in  every  year  paid  off,  and  confequcntly 
by  additions  in  every  year  greater  than  thole 
made  by  it  in  the  year  before,  will  be  fufficient, 
not  only  to  difcharge  our  prefent  debts,  but  any 
probable  addition  in  the  mean  time  to  be  made 
to  them,  by  farther  loans  on  new-invented 
funds,  in  a  few  years  after  the  prefent  debts 
fliall  be  difcharged  *,  and  that  the  time  required 
for  the  difcharge  of  gur  debts,  increaied  by  any 
addition  in  this  manner  made,  will  by  no  means 
be  lengthened  out,  or  the  payment  of  the  whole 
of  our  debts  by  the  Sinking  Fund  retarded,  in 
proportion  to  the  addition  to  or  increafe  of  the 
debt  itfelf ;  the  total  payment  of  our  debts  be¬ 
coming  by  no  means  defperate,  from  any  Sink- 
ing  Fund,  however  lefs  than  that  above  fup- 
poled,  upon  ;jiccounc  of  any  determined  increale 
of  or  additions  made  to  them. — This  is  lo  true, 
that  fuppofitions  about  tlie  increale  of  the  pub- 
lie  debts  might  be  carried  to  the  inmoft  extra- 


cc 


cc 


ec 


cc 


cc 


ci; 


cc 


i.  c 


Cli 


vaga  nee, 


I, 


Cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
-cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 


(  77  ) 

vagafice,  and  ftill  appear  to  be  provided  for  by 
the  above-mentioned  Sinking  Fund. — Nor  will 
this  at  all  furprize  perfons  who  have  been  ac- 
cuftomed  to  attend  to  the  iricreafe  of  money 
put  out  to  compound  intereft,  or  quantities 
continued  in  geometrical  progreffion  ;  an  en¬ 
quiry  into  which  will  remove  all  doubts  about 
the  truth  of  what  I  have  advanced.  It  would, 
however,  be  true,  that  if  at  any  time,  on  the 
difcharge  of  any  part  of  the  principal  of  the 
prefent  debt,  the  intereft  were  not  added  to  and 
applied  in  the  farther  difcharge  of  the  remaining 
debt,  but  another  equal  or  greater  principal 
fum  fhould  be  borrowed  on  the  fame  annuity, 
the  progrefs  of  the  Sinking  Fund  would  by  fuch 
meafures,  if  the  fame  fum  were  borrowed,  be 
ftopped,  and,  if  a  greater,  be  put  backwards. 
But  as  long  as  thefe  meafures  are  not  taken,  or 
the  Sinking  Fund  diverted  or  applied  to  any 
other  purpofe  than  the  difcharge  of  our  debts, 
the  full  and  effeftual  payment  of  all  our  debts 
by  this  expedient,  is  by  no  means  to  be  de- 
fpaired  of,  from  the  increate  of  them  by  new 
loans  on  farther  duties. - And  that  the  Sink¬ 

ing  Fund  will  from  time  to  time  be  applied  to 
the  difcharge  of  the  public  debts,  and  not  be 
diverted  or  applied  to  any  other  purpofe  what¬ 
ever,  is  what,  I  think,  we  may  promife  ourfelves 
from  confidering,  that  the  aforelaid  fund  has 
been  appropriated  to  that  purpofe  by  the  legi- 
flature,  and  our  public  faith  in  the  fame  manner 
engaged  to  the  creditors  of  the  government, 
that  the  furplus  of  the  aforefaid  duties  Ihould 
applied  to  the  difcharge  oi  the  principal  of  thele 
debts,  as  the  funds  themfelves  to  the  payment 
of  the  interejl  or  annuities  contrafted  for.  Which 
faith  of  the  public  in  this  manner  engaged,  I 

think,  wc  have  all  the  realon  in  the  wor  d  to 

“  believe. 


iC 

cc 

cc 


<c 

cc 

cc 

C( 

cc 

<c 

ftw 

cc 

cc 

.'cc 

cc 

cc 

cC 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

iC 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
c; 
cc 

iC 

cc 
cc 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 


believe,  will  be  as  inviolably  obferved  in  this 
as  in  any  other  part  of  this  contraft  with  the 
proprietors  of  the  public  debts.” 

Page  44.  “  Nor  can  this  provifion  be  well 

underftood,  as  made  by  the  government  for 
what  appeared  for  public  convenience  only,  and 
confequentiy  to  be  altered  by  fubfequent  afts, 
whenever  it  fliall  appear  or  be  pretended  to  be 
otherwife;  but  mull,  I  think,  be  confidered  as 
a  contraft  by  the  government  with  the  public 
creditors,  if  the  occafion  of  the  afls  of  parlia¬ 
ment  which  eftablilhed  the  Sinking  Fund  be  at- 
tended  to.  In  which  cafe  it  will  appear,  that 
the  feveral  provifions  by  thefe  ails  made,  were 
enacted  and  propofed  to  the  creditors,  as  in- 
ducernents  to  them  to  accept  of  an  annuity  or 
intereft  for  their  debts,  by  one  6th  part  lefa 
than  that  which  till  that  time  they  had  received; 
to  which  the  moft  obvious  inducement  was,  that 
what  was  thus  deduefled  from  the  yearly  intereft 
of  their  debts,  Ihould  be  applied  for  the  better 
fecuring  and  gradual  difcharge  of  the  principal 
or  the  faid  debts :  To  which  fecurity,  amono- 
tne  other  benefits  by  the  fame  ad  of  par]iamcn° 
propofed  to  them,  they  muft,  I  think,  be  con- 
ndered  to  have  entitled  themfelves,  by  their 
fubferiptions  afterwards  made  fubfequent  to,  and 
in  confideration  of,  fuch  propofals  made  to  them 
by  the  legiflature.  And  whoever  will  be  at  the 
trouble  of  turning  over  the  feveral  fubfequent 
adls  of  parliament,  relating  to  the  public  debts, 
will  find  this  provifion  for  the  application  of 
the  Sinking  Fund  frequently  repeated  and  con¬ 
firmed.  And  in  cafes  where,  by  aft  of  parlia¬ 
ment,  application  of  monies  in  the  Sinking 
bund,  to  the  dilcharge  of  debts,  that  were  Jels 
obvioufiy  or  lefs  generally  known,  to  have  been 

“  witjiin 


^ 


5K,.i^v 


(  79  ) 

within  the  defcription  of  the  debts  intended  by 
the  provifion  above  recited  ;  fuch  debts  have 
been,  by  the  recitals,  declared  and  explained 
to  have  been  debts  incurred  before  the  25th  of 
December^  1716,  and  provided  for  by  parliament, 
in  a  manner,  that  has  plainly  intimated  it  to  be 
underftood  by  the  legiflature,  that  the  above- 
recited  provifion  was  an  engagement  or  contract 
of  the  government  with  the  public  creditors, 
about  the  punctual  obfervation  of  which  from 
time  to  time,  they  were  entitled  to  have  all  pof- 
fible  fatisfadion  :  Or  at  lead,  that  the  punftual 
application  of  the  abovementioned  furplufies  to 
the  difeharge  of  our  prefent  debts,  was  regarded 
by  them  as  a  matter  of  the  higheft  confequence 
to  the  public  welfare.  And  as  long  as  the  pub¬ 
lic  welfare  fiiall  be  in  the  lead  regarded,  and 
this  continues  to  be  the  only  expedient  for  remov¬ 
ing  fuch  heavy  incumbrances  on  our  affairs,  and 
redeeming  fo  confiderable  a  revenue  to  the  ufe 
of  the  public  j  I  think  we  may  confidently  ex- 
peft,  that  no  perfon  whatever,  into  whofe  hands 
the  adminidration  of  our  affairs  may  at  any  time  - 
for  the  future  be  committed,  can  ever  be  in¬ 
duced  to  approve  or  recommend  the  application 
of  the  produce  of  the  Sinking  Fund,  in  any  p of- 
fible  exigence  of  our  affairs^  to  any  other  ufes  than 
thofe  to  which  it  dands  now  appropriated, 
though  there  were  no  other  confiderations  to 
enforce  it.  For  let  us  enquire  a  little,  what 
public  exigencies  can  be  fuppofed  to  happen, 
that  can  make  it  at  any  time  advifable  to  divert 
or  apply  the  produce  of  the  Sinking  Fund  to 
any  other  purpofe,  till  after  the  entire  payment 
of  our  public  debts.  Let  the  expence  that  the 
circumdances  of  our  affairs  may  render  at  any 
time  neceffary,  be  ever  fo  much  more  than  can 

be 


*  # 


(  So  ) 

be  conveniently  raifed  within  the  year;  it  hiiift,' 
I  think,  always  appear  more  eligible  in  regard 
to  the  public  interell,  to  raife  ‘what  fhalF  be 
farther  wanted,  by  incrcafing  the  public  debts 
with  faithei  loans  upon  intereft  provided  for 
by  new  duties,  than  to  iupply  the  fame  fums  in 
‘‘  any  way  from  the  produce  of  the  Sinking  Fund. 

The  computation  I  have  laft  made,  was  to 
fhew,  that  the  time  in  which  the  above  fuppofed 
Sinking  Fund  of  1.000,000/.  will  be  fufficient 
to  complete  the  difcharge  of  the  public  debts, 
‘‘  will  by  no  means  increale  equally  to  the  increafe 
of  the  principal  fum  of  thofe  debts  by  farther 
loans  on  new  funds.  But  it  may  be  of  farther 
ufe  to  fhew,  how  much  lefs  the  increafe  of  the 
public  debts,  by  borrowing  farther  fums  at  in- 
tereft  provided  for  by  new  funds,  will  retard  the 
difcharge  of  the  whole  of  the  pulDlic  debts,  than 
the  fupplying  the  fame  fums  in  any  way  from  the 
produce  of  the  Sinking  Fund  would  do.  Let  us 
fuppofe,  for  inftance,  that  the  government  was 
obliged,  for  25  years  together,  to  increafe  the 
prefent  debt  by  a  million  borrowed  every  year  at 
an  intereft  of  4  per  cent,  provided  for  by  farther 
funds.  The  above-made  computation  will  fhew, 
that  that  additional  debt  of  25  millions  would 
be  paid  off  by  a  Sinking  Fund  of  one  million  in 
‘‘  little  more  than  feven  years,  after  the  difcharge 
of  the  prefent  50  millions.  But  if  the  fame 
fum  were  to  be  iupplied  out  of  the  produce  of 
the  Sinking  Fund,  it  is  obvious,  that  the  pay- 
ment  of  the  public  debts  muft  ftand  ftill  for  25 
years,  and  be,  by  more  than  two  thirds  of  that 
time,  retarded  beyond  the  time  in  which  they 
would  otherwife  be  difchargcd,  though  increafed 
as  aforefaid.  And  the  greater  the  ium  is  fup- 
pofed  to  be,  that  in  thefe  different  ways  is  to 

“  be 


(  8i  ) 

**  be  fupplied,  the  greater  will  be  the  proportion 
in  which  the  payment  of  oiir  debts  will  be  de- 
layed,  by  fupplying  fuch  expence  from  the 
Sinking  Fund  rather  than  in  the  other  way^ 
Or  if  the  fums,  in  thefe  different  ways  fupplied,^ 
‘‘  ftiould  be  fuppofed  lefs,  the  difference  of  the 
delay  in  thefe  two  cafes  will  be  indeed  lefs. 
But,  on  fuppofition  of  the  Imallefl:  fums  to  be 
thefe  two  different  ways  fupplied,  the  delay 
‘‘  arifing  to  the  difcharge  of  the  public  debts  by 
this  mifapplication  of  the  Sinking  Fund,  will  be 
at  leaft  three  times  as  great  as  that  which  will 
be  occafioned  by  increafing  the  public  debts  in 

the  other  method. - The  borrowing  money  on 

“  the  income  of  the  Sinking  Fund  in  any  form, 
if  no  more  were  in  any  one  year  borrowed,  than 
what  had  been  by  the  Sinking  Fund  the  year 
before  paid  off ;  and  if  that  money  be  fuppofed 
to  be  borrowed  at  the  fame  rate  of  intereft,  that 
“  was  payable  for  the  debt  before  paid  off,  will 
have  the  fame  effect  in  delaying  the  payment  of 
the  public  debts,  as  the  mifapplication  of  the  re- 
venue  of  the  Sinking  Fund  the  year  before 
would  have  had.  But  if  greater  fums  be  at  any 
time  borrowed  on  that  fund,  the  payrnent  of 
“  the  public  debts  will  not  only  be  flopped,  but 
put  backwards ;  and  that  in  a  manner  that  ob- 
‘‘  viouQy  leads  not  only  to  delay  the  payment  of 
the  public  debts,  but  the,  caking  away  entirely 
“  the  only  fecurity  yet  provided  that  they  fhall  be 
ever  paid  off.  For  which  reafon,  I  (hall  not 
‘‘  enter  into  any  computation  of  the  different  de- 
grees  in  which  different  fteps  in  purfuing  thefe 
meafures  will  affedt  us,  but  at  once  fuppofe  it 
IMPOSSIBLE,  that  any  perfons  can  propole  to  bor- 
‘‘  row  money  (or  much  lefs  to  fucceed  in  it)  on 
the  credit  of  fchemes,  that  themfelves  dellroy 

M  all 


\ 


(  82  ) 

all  probability  of  the  repayment  of  it,  whicit' 
""  filch  meafures  as  thefe  muft  evidently  appear  ta 

do. - 1  cannot,  therefore,  among  the  ordinary 

vicillitiides  of  the  affairs  of  any  nation,  not  even 
among  any  long  and  expen&ve  wars>  find  out 
that  exigence  of  our  affairs,  that  can  make  the 
mifapplication  ot  the  Sinking  Fund  appear  ne- 
ceffary  or  probable  to  be  put  in  praftice  •,  while 
it  is  fo  certain  that  the  lands,  eftates,  expence,^ 
or  commerce  of  Great  Britain^  will  yet  eafily 
admit  of  farther  duties  fufficient  to  furnifh  new 
funds  to  aniwer  the  interefl  of  fuch  fums  as  any 
public  occafions  can  call  for.  Nor  can  I  fear, 
‘‘  that  Inch  duties  will  not  be  chearfully  voted  and 
iubmitted  to,  when  they  flaall  appear  neceffary 
to  prevent  the  mifapplication  of  an  annual  fum, 
employed  in  fo’ufeful  and  neceffary  a  fervicc  to 
the  public  as  the  redu6lion  of  our  debts,  while 
that  appears  to  be  retarded  fo  much  more  by 
difeontinuing  the  payment  of  thefe  debts,  than 
by  the  increafe  of  them.” 

Page  65.  In  order  to  preferve  our  liberty 
and  fafety,  it  requires  our  utmoft  care  to 
prevent  the  unneceffary  increafe  of  our  debts, 
and  to  promote,  as  much  as  poflible,  the 
redudtion  of  them  :  A  matter  of  that  confe- 
quence  to  this  kingdom,  that,  if  I  fliould  ever 
fee  it  negledied,  no  confideration  in  nature 
could  reftrain  me  from  expofing  it.  On  fuch  an 
occafion  I  Ibould  think. 

Fas  mihi  gratoriim  facrata  refolvere  jura^ 

Fas  cdijfe  virus ^  atqiie  omnia  ferre  fuh  aurasd'" 

I  he  following  words  in  a  defence  of  this  EJfay^ 
by  the  fame  wriier,  are  particularly  luitable  to 
niv  own  cafe. 

5 


As 


(C 


Cl 


cc 


cc 


(  83  ) 

As  to  what  I  have  advanced,  that  it  is  more 
eligible  to  raife  what  money  may  be  farther 
wanted,  by  increafing  the  public  debts  with  far¬ 
ther  loans  upon  intereft  provided  for  by  hew 
duties,  than  to  fupply  the  fame  fums  from  the 
Sinking  Fund  ;  it  is  a  truth  of  public  confe- 
quence  to  be  attended  to,  and  what  1  have, 
therefore,  explained  and  proved  to  be  a  truth  : 
And  it  muft  outlive  all  the  pleafantries  that 
have  been  excited  by  it.  Nor  can  I  think,  that 
there  can  be  any  great  difficulty  in  underftand- 

ing  it.- - *1  have  not  in  any  part  of  my  Elfay, 

recommended  an  addition  to  our  debts,  but 
upon  an  occafion  when  it  would  be  abfolutely 
neceffary  to  prevent  the  mifapplication  of  the 
Sinkino;  Fund.  And  if  the  interefts  of  this 
kingdom  in  thefe  different  meafures,  upon  any 
fuch  occafion,  was  not  before  generally  attended 
to  or  underltood,  I  have  fo  much  the  greater 
reafon  to  be  fatisfied  in  having  recommended  it 
to  the  public  notice.” 

Mr.  Smart,  at  the  end  of  his  tables  of  intereft, 
has  given  the  fame  account  of  the  Sinking  Fund, 
with  that  contained  in  thefe  extracts.  See  page  32.. 
Mr.  PosTLETHWAYT  ajfo,  in  his  dictionary,  under 
che  articles,  credit.^  debts^funds^  &ic.  has  made 

many  of  the  fame  obfervations  *,  and  infifted  parti¬ 
cularly  on  the  evil  of  alienating  the  Sinking  Fund, 
in  order  to  avoid  borrowing.  It  has  appeared  far¬ 
ther,  in  page  28,  29,  that  this  was  tor  fome  years 
fo  well  known  to  our  governors,  that  they  even 
praCtifed  upon  it.  They  foon,  indeed,  changed 
their  conduct,  but  not  in  confequence  of  obtaining 
new  light. 

It  has  been  lately  urged  to  me,  that  all  taxes  for 
paying  the  intereft  of  fums  borrowed  to  avoid  alie- 
natioif,  might  be  brought  to  the  fund,  and  there  im- 

M  2  proved 


-r-  -. 


(  84  ) 

proved  in  paying  debts  at  compound  intereft,  in  the 
fame  manner  with  the  intereft  of  any  fums  that  can 
be  taken  from  the  fund.  This  is  undoubtedly  true-, 
and  the  proper  inference  from  it  is,  that  were  this 
done  j  that  is,  were  new  taxes  or  annuities,  equal 
w  the  intereft  of  the  fums  alienated,  always  brought 
into  the  fund,  there  would  be  no  harm  in  alienation. 
But  the  inference  which  has  been  drawn  from 
hence  is,  that  alienations  can  do  no  harm  when 
this  is  not  done ;  and,  particularly,  when  made 
on  purpofe,  as  ours  have  been,  to  avoid  creat¬ 
ing  new  taxes.  See  page  67.  It  is  extremely 
irkfome  to  me  to  be  obliged  to  take  notice  of  fuch 
objeftions.  The  truth  is,  that  this  would  not  be 
properly  alienation.  It  would  be  only  taking  with 
one  hand,  and  giving  as  much  with  the  other.  For, 
in  this  cafe,  if  neceflary  fervices  call  for  money, 
replacing  the  intereft  of  the  fum  alienated  is,  to  all 
intents  and  purpofes,  the  fame  with  replacing  the 
fum  itfelf. 


Extraft 


(  8s  ) 


Extraft  from  the  Supplement  to  a  Treatife, 
entitled,  Obfervations  on  Reverjionary  Pay¬ 
ments ,  &CC.  Page  361,  362, 

“  l^R.  Davenant  fays,  that  at  Michaelmas, 
JL/  year  1685,  it  appeared,  by  a  fur- 

vey  of  the  hearth-books,  that  the  number  of 
houfes  in  all  England  and  Wales  was 
1.300,000,  of  which  554,631,  were  houfes  of 
only  one  chimney.  Dr.  Davenanth  works,  Vol.  II. 
Page  203. — In  his  ElTay  on  IVays  andMeans^  &c. 
Vol.  I.  Page  33.  he  gives  a  particular  ac- 
count  of  the  number  of  houfes  and  hearths  in 
every  county,  according  to  the  hearth-hooks  of 
‘‘  Lady-Day,  169O;  and  the  fum  total  then  was 

- •A.t  the  Reftoratipn  it  appeared 

‘‘  by  the  fame  hearth-books,  that  the  number  of 
houfes  in  the  kingdom  was  1.230,000.  Conti- 

nuation  of  Rapin,  Vol.  I.  Page  53. - In  the 

interval,  therefore,  between  the  Reftoration  and 
the  Revolution,  the  people  of  England  had  in- 
creafed  above  300,000  ;  and  of [mailer  tenement Sj 
Dr.  Davenant  obferves,  there  had  been,  from 
“  1666  to  1688,  about  70,000  new  foundations 
‘‘  laid.  Dr.  T)avenanf%  Works,  Vol,  I.  Page  370. 

■  ‘  But  what  a  melancholy  change  has  taken  place 

fince  - In  1759,  the  number  of  houfes  in 

‘‘  England  and  Wales  was  986,482  ;  of  which, 
not  more  than  330,000  were  houfes  having  lefs 
than  feven  windows.--^— In  1766,  notwith- 
{landing  the  increafe  of  buildings  in  London^  the 

number  of  houfes  was  reduced  to  980,692. - - 

“  According  to  thefe  accounts  then,  our  people 
have,  fince  the  year  1690,  decreafed  near  a 

million 


{  86  ) 


million  and  a  halt.  And  the  wafle  has  fallen 
principally  on  the  inhabitants  of  cottages.*’ 

The  particulars  of  the  general  return  in  1759, 
%vere. 


Houfes  inhabited,  in  charge  .  —  679,149 

Houfes  uninhabited,  chargeable  —  24,904 

Cottages  dilcharged  for  poyeiiy  only  (a)  282,429 


Total 

Thefe  particulars  were  in  1766, 

Houfes  inhabited,  in  charge  — 
Houfes  uninhabited,  chargeable  — 
Cottages  difeharged  for  poverty  only 

Total 


986,482 


678,915 

25,628 

276,149 

980,692 


Dr.  Davenafit^s  account  (^),  mentioned  in  this 
extraft,  may,  I  believe^  be  depended  upon  j  and  it 

is 


{a)  It  is  remarkable  in  thefe  accounts,  that  the  redutlion  in 
the  number  of  houfes  from  the  year  1759  to  1766,  was  confined 
entirely  to  the  cottages. 

Dr.  Brakenri DGE  tells  us,  (in  Philofophical  TranfatTtions, 
Vol.  49,  p.  270,  aiivi  p.  887.)  that,  in  1 710,  the  number  of  houfes 
in  England  and  Wales,  exclufive  of  cottages,  (and  probably 
alfo  of  chargeable  houles  uninhabited)  was  found,  by  a  par¬ 
ticular  furvey  in  order  to  an  afleffment,  to  be  729,048.  — 
cannot  fay  what  regard  is  due  to  this  account ;  but  could  it  be 
relied  on,  it  would  furnifii  a  faff  of  fome  confequence  on  the 
prefent  fubjeft. — Dr.  Brakenrxdge  has  fuppolcd  the  number 
of  cottages  at  this  time  to  be  no  more  than  182,262.  But  as  they 
were  276,149,  in  1766;  and  282,429,  in  1759 ;  and  554,631, 
in  1685  ;  they  may,  with  much  more  reafon,  be  reckoned 
to  have  been  in  1710,  at  leaft  400,000;  and  this  will  make  the 
ivhoje  number  of  ho,ufcs  then  in  the  kingdom  as  much  lefs 
than  they  had  been,  and  as  much  more  than  they  are  now,  as 
there  would  be  reafon  to  cxpefl  on  the  fuppofition  of  fuch  a 
depopulation  as  1  have  mentioned. 

{I?)  Some  have  fufpefled,  that  this  account  is  no  more  than 
the  reluit  of  a  calculaticsr,  made  by  Dr.  DuvenaJrt  from  the 

number 


(  ^7  ) 

is  probable,  that  the  other  accounts  arc  but  too 
exa£t.  If  there  is  any  room  for  doubt,  it  may  be 
removed,  with  little  expence  or  trouble,  by  an  order 
to  the  collectors  of  the  houfe  and  window  duties 
to  make  more  careful  returns.  This  would  help 
to  decide  a  point  of  great  confequence  ;  and  the 
legiflature  will,  I  hope,  feme  time  or  other  think  it 
an  objeft  worthy  of  attention. 

The  account  of  Norfolk^  in  the  following  paper, 
contains  a  farther  mortifying  proof,  that  depopula¬ 
tion  has  for  many  years  been  going  on  among  us. 

I  have  received  it  from  a  gentleman  of  diftinguifhed 
charafter  and  abilities',  who  is  well  acquainted  with 
tht  oi  Norfolk^  and  the  adjoining  counties; 
and  who  has  much  obliged  and  honoured  me,  by 
giving  me  leave  to  publifh  it. 

T  For  many  years  believed  the  prevailing  opi- 
L  nion  to  be  true  ;  namely,  that  the  number  of 
the  inhabitants  of  this  ifland  had  been  generally 
at  lead,  if  not  uniformly,  increafing,  in  ail  parts 
of  it  from  the  conqueft. 

‘‘  But  farther  obfervation  has  occafioned  me  to 
think,  that  I  have  rather  taken  the  fa6l  for 
granted,  than  built  it  on  any  evidence ;  except 

number  of  hearths  Firll,  Had  this  been  true,  he  would 

•have  given  fome  intimation  of  it. — Secondly,  Jn  this  account 
the  number  of  heufes  and  hearths  in  every  county  is  fpeciiied, 
and  the  houfes  which  had  only  one  hearth  dilHnguilhed  from 
the  reft  ;  and  thefe  are  particulars  which  no  one  could  think 
of  determining,  by  any  calculation  from  the  number  of  hearths 
only.  , 

In  Mr.  Houghton’s  Hufbandry,  publifhed  in  we^ekly  pa¬ 
pers  in  1693,  the  number  of  houfes  then  in  the  kingdom,  is 
made  to  be  1.175,951.  But  it  is  not  faid  how  this  account 
was  obtained.  It  is  given  in  a  work  of  little  credit,  and  among 
other  accounts  that  are  too  vague  and  conjediiura]  ;  and,  there* 
fore,  in  my  opinion,  is  by  no  means  of  equal  authority  to 
Dr.  Daisenant's  more  particular  account. 

“  the 


(  88  ) 

“  the  proof  furnifhed  by  the  palpable  increafe  of 
“  the  inhabitants  of  many  of  our  towns. 

“  And  when  I  have  confidered,  that  all  the 
“  towns  that  can  be  called  great  towns,  do  not, 
“  probably,  together  contain  one  fourth  part  of  the 
“  people  of  the  ifland,  I  have  feen  the  neceffity  of 
“  adverting  more  than  I  had  before  done,  to  the 
“  ftate  of  population  in  the  market-towns  and  vil- 
“  lages,  in  former  times. 

“  It  has  happened  to  me  in  the  courfe  of  many 
“  years  obfervation,  to  have  feen  reafon,  in  many 
“  cafes,  to  conclude,  and  in  many  others  to  con- 
“  jefture,  upon  various  foundations,  that  in  the 
“  counties  of  Norfolk^  Suffolk,  and  Effex,  (thofe 
“  I  am  beft  acquainted  with)  the  market-towns  and 

villages  have,  in  general,  fewer  inhabitants  than 
“  they  refpedively  had  at  {a)  fome  former  period. 

“  In  the  county  of  Norfolk  I  know  but  one 
“  town  or  village,  great  of  fmall,  that  is  evidently 
“  now  better  peopled,  than  at  any  time  heretofore  •, 
“  it  is  the  little  fea-port  of  Wells.  I  do  not  fay 
“  there  is  no  other,  it  is  probable  there  may  be 
“  more  than  one  befides ;  but  I  am  not  acquainted 
“  with  any  fuch.,  I  am  willing,  particularly,  to 
“  fuppofe  Norwich  may  now  too  contain  a  more 
“  numerous  body  of  citizens,  than  it  did  in  former 
“  times-,  yet,  not  to  mention  that  it  is  univerfaily 
“  believed  to  have  fuffered  the  lofs  of  fome  thou- 
“  fands  lately,  if  we  give  any  degree  of  credit 
“  (even  with  large  allowances  for  exaggeration)  to 
“  general  hiftory,  and  the  city  muniments,  that  city 
“  muft  once  have  been  abundantly  fuller  of  people : 

[a)  The  writer  of  thefe  obfervations  carries  his  views  as  far 
back  as  the  Reformatio7i ;  and  it  was  about  this  period  he  thinks 
the  depopulation  he  has  deferibed  chiefly  begun.  Nor  is  he 
convinced  that  it  has  been  nearly  fo  great  fince  the  Revolution, 
as  the  decreafe  in  the  number  of  houfes,  according  to  the  re¬ 
turns  in  1759  and  1766,  feems  to  imply, 


{  89  ) 


as  it  is  related  to  have  loft  more  than  50,000 
people  in  one  year  by  the  plagUe  (a), 

l.yfni  has  the  appearance  of  a  town  formerly 
more  flourifhing  ^  and  Thetford  hardly  preferves 
any  appearance  at  all.  But  palTing  by  thefe 
towns,  there  are  more  than  600  county  pariflics 
in  Norfolk,  It  is  well  knowil,  and  admitted, 
churches  were  in  a  degree,  in  popifli  tidies,  the 
works  of  oftentation  father  than  necefflty  ;  cer- 
tainly  a  church  was  often  built,  though  fome 
neighbouring  church  might  have  held  the  pa- 
rifhiohbrs  of  both ;  But  it  is  incredible  that  a 
fpacious  buildihg,  fometimes  with  three  ifles^ 
ihould  have  been  built  to  hbld  a  Angle  family^ 
or  even  2  of  3  ;  rnore  incredible,  that  many  of 
thefcj  foon  aftet  the  Reformation,  fhould  have 
‘‘  been  fufhiftied  with  feats  fufficient  for  a  hun- 


dred  people,  often  rhbrb  ;  Or,  in  Aioft,  that  any 
parifh  Aiould  have  been  inhabited  by  one,  two, 
or  even  ten  families  ohly.  Yet  we  have  twenty 
or  thirty  pariAies,  cohfifting  now  of  one  family, 
arid  for  oUght  1  kno'vV’,  an  huridfed  of  lefs  than 
ten. 

“  But,  without  feftirig  Upon  probability,  riiany  of 


Sc 


cc 


cc 

u 


cc 


&c 


thofe  pariA:ies,  riow  almoft  depopulated,  appear, 
by  inconteftable  evidence,  to  have  had,  one  or 
two  centuries  ago,  fome  two  Or  thfee  hundred 
communicants,  fOme  two  Or  three  hundred 
houfes,  and  moft  of  them  twenty,  thirty^  or 
fifty  houfes  •  theft  hoUfts  are,  many  of  them,  ftlll 
to  be  ften  in  ruins,  and  the  feft  appear  in  maps,^ 
ancient  deeds,  >&c.  which  are  confirmed  by  old 
vVells  arid  othef  vcftigia. 

{a)  The  annual  medium  of  burials  at  Nohnjskh  for  teft 
years,  from  1739  to  1749^  was  —  ,  —  1220 

from  1749  to  1759  — .  — 1.  1241 

from  1759  to  1769  — L  J'54 

N  ti? 


(  90  ) 

In  many  of  the  parifn^G  of  Norfolk^  there  hare 
been  heretofore  more  manor-houfes,  than  there 
are  now  dwellings  of  all  forts ;  in  the  moil:  popu- 
Ions  of  them,  more  copyhold -houfes,  exclufive 
‘‘  of  thofe  of  freehold  tenure:  thele  rafts  appear 
by  court  rolls. 

In  mofi  ot  them,  a  lefs  obvious,  yet  not  lefs 
convincing  proof  of  former  population,  arifcs 
from  the  many  hundreds^  fometimes  thoufands 
of  proper  names,  dhtingihdiing  fields,  inclo- 
fures,  roads,  remarkable  trees,  gate-ways,  foot- 
paths,  that  have  tormerly  been  knov/n  and  pre- 
lerved,  yet  nov/ almoft  univerfally  forgot  *,  nay,, 
the  exifience  of  many  of  thefe  roads  and  foot- 
paths,  to  a  careful  obferver,  frequently  proves 
the  former  great  population,  as  in  the  prefent 
condition  of  the  place  they  are  altogether  need- 
lefs. 

If  all  thefe  obfervations  are  applicable,  more 
or  lefs,  to  the  inland  part’  of  the  county,  they 
are  much  more  fo  to  the  fea  coaft;  the  villages 
ficnated  upon  v/hich  and  within  four  or  five 
miles  of  it,  efpecially  thofe  wliich  feem  for- 
merly  to  have  been  rather  fmall  towns,  are  all 
‘‘  fo  many  feenes  of  defolation. 

1  am  aware  it  may  be  faid,  that  in  cafe  towns 
have  decayed  in  one  place,  they  have  improved 
in  another  ;  if  fmall  farm-houfes  and  cottages 
have  been  fuffered  to  decay,  many  fair  and  large 
“  farm-houfes  have  been  erefted  in  their  room  i 
‘‘  that  upon  the  fea-coaft,  V/ells  has  run  away  with 
the  trade  of  nine  or  ten  fmall  towns,  and  that  it 
exports  five  times  as  much  corn  as  all  thofe  now 
fmaller  towns  did  an  hundred  years  ago  ;  that 
hufbandry  is  ■  greatly  improved  all  over  the 
county,  and  that  though  there  is  more  wheat 
confumed  in  it  than  in  any  former  time,  it  yet 
exports  an  amazing  quantity  every  year. 

AH' 


(  91  ) 

All  this  is  true,  and  yet  docs  not  any  way 
V  diminiOa  the  force  of  my  leafons  tor  believing 
the  county  depopulated. 

“  Many  more  acres  of  land  are  brought  under 
tillage  in  the  weftern  part  of  the  county,  and 
the  art  of  hufbandry  is  much  improved  in  every 
part  of  it ;  the  quantity  of  grain  produced  from 
an  acre,  is  increafed  ;  and  though  tlie  ufe  of 
wheat  is  much  more  general  among  the  poor, 
yet  their  number  being  diminifned,  as  well  as 
the  quantity  grown  increafed,  there  refts  a  great 
deal  for  exportation  to  London  and  to  foreign 
countries. 

Heretofore  an  hundred  fmall  farms  produced 
little  more  than  enough  to  keep  the  farmer,  his 
family,  and  fervants ;  the  refidue  fupplied  the 
“  neighbouring  market-towns;  vi  very  fmall  part 
“  of  the  produce  of  agriculture  found  its  way  out 
of  the  county  :  except  lambs  and  wool,  the  ex- 
portation  was  little  but  wax,  honey,  and  faffron. 
Money  was,  therefore,  colleded  to  pay  the  taxes 
with  difficulty. 

“  It  is  a  fade  and  vulgar  notion,  that  fmall 
farms  tend  to  make  provifions  cheap  ;  they 
bring  little  to  market ;  whereas  the  great  farms 
confume  very  little  in  proportion  to  what  they 
bring  to  market ;  great  towns  can  only  be  fup- 
.plied  with  the  quantity  of  wheat-flour  now  con- 
fumed,  from  large  farms.  The  charge  of  corn- 
bination  is  abfurd,  and,  for  the  moll  parr,  is 
not  made  by  thofe  who  are  fools  enough  to  be- 
lieve  it  poffible;  but  by  thofe  who  happen  to  be 
intercfled  for  the  prelent  to  keep  down  the  price 
of  corn. 

But  though  the  great  farms,  far  from  advanc- 
ino*  the  price  of  provifions,  (except  in  the  articles 
of^poulcry,  &c.)  tend  to  lower  them,  they  arc 
not  in  all  refpeas  beneficial  to  a  country.  Wells 

jvj  2  exports 


(  92  ) 

exports  five  times  as  much  corn,  as  all  the  fmall 
“  port-towns  now  in  ruins,  but  it  does  not  bree^ 
“  half  the  children,  perhaps  notone  tenth.  Again, 
“  within  land,  five  Imall  farm-houfes,  and  twenty 
‘‘  cottages,  lie  in  ruins  ;  one  handfome  farm-houfe 
“  is  built  in  their  room,  and  undoubtedly  makes; 
a  better  figure,  yet  often  contains  but  one  breed- 
ing  woman,  and  fometimes  not  one. 

“  This  brings  me  to  what  I  fuppole  the  caufe 
“  of  the  depopulation  I  have  obferved. 

“  Mankind  feldom  grow  thin  in  any  country, 
“  through  the  defect  of  the  natural  .powers  of  pro- 
“  creation-,  thefe  powers,  almofl:  all  over  the  world, 
“  fiir  out-run  the  bufinels  of  keeping  up  the  ftock, 
“  and  are  even  capable,  when  not  obltriifted,  of 
‘‘  making  a  very  rapid  increafe  of  the  fpecies. 

“  Neither  is  this  ftock  apt  to  diminilh  by  pef- 
“  tilence,  fword,  or  famine,  while  the  powers  of 
“  propagation  have  their  full  eftedt  (by  which  I 
“  mean,  the  breeding  up  as  well  as  producing  the 
“  children)  ;  they  prefently  ftop  the  gaps  made  by 
“  the  fevereft  devaftations  ;  nay,  providence  has 
“  fo  contrived  it,  that  moft  of  thefe  aftlidions  havp 
“  a  natural  tendency  to  encourage  the  propagation 
“  neceffary  to  cure  their  effedt.  But  the  manners 
“  and  political  circumftances  of  a  people,  as  on 
“  one  hand  they  are  capable  of  giving  the  .moft 
‘‘  powerful  aids  fo  on  the  other,  they  may  dry 
up,  more  or  lefs,  the  very  fources  of  human 
“  life. 

‘‘  In  the  moft  refined  ftate  of  civilization,  few 
‘‘  children  are  produced  and  brought  up  by  the 
higheft  and  loweft  clafles  of  mankind.  The"  leafi 
“  attention  to  lubjedfs  of  this  kind,  convinces 
S'  every  obferver  of  the  truth  of  this  propofition. 
In  proportion,  therefore,  as  luxury  incrcafes, 
and  civilization  grows  greater,  the  vis  prepagandi 
(Jif  I  rriay  fo  call  it)  decreafes  ;  and  if  with  this 


{  93  ) 

increafe  of  civilization,  the  individuals  of  thefe 
clafies  increafe  in  number,  the  mifehief  is  fo 
much  greater. 

‘‘  Heretofore,  a  Hundred  in  Norfolk  might  pro- 
‘‘  bably  be  inhabited  by  twenty  country  gentle- 
men,  who  came  feldom  to  London^  twenty  to  thirty 
clergymen,  two  hundred  yeomen,  two  hundred 
fmall  farmers  of  fome  fubftance,  a  thoufand  la- 
‘‘  bouring  men,  of  whom  half  of  them  owned 
their  own  cottages,  befides  that  the  greater 
part  of  the  remainder  were  in  hopes  of,  fome 
time  or  other,  becoming  the  owners  of  what  it 
was  common  to  fee  labouring  men  owners  of, 
by  induftry  and  frugality  ;  and  befidcs  thefe, 
there  might  be  from  fifty  to  an  hundred  tradef- 
men  of  various  forts,  fmiths,  wheelwrights,  lit- 
tie  fiiop-keepers,  &c.  moft;  of  whom  had  fome 
fort  of  property.  Except  that  thefe  laft  are  not 
fo  often  the  owners  of  their  own  houfes,  perhaps 
in‘  other  refpeds  their  property  may  be  the 
fame.  J3ut  for  the  reft  : 

The  gentlemen  are  reduced  to  three  or  four 
in  a  hundred^  (often  to  none)  of  whom  the 
greater  part  refort  to  London  occafionally,  and 
there  acqtiire  a  difpofition  for  expence  and  ce- 
libacyr  The  clergy  are  much  lefs  numerous, 
two,  three,  four,  and  even  five  parifties  being 
fometimes  confolidated  and  united.  Of  the  four 
hundred  yeomen  and  fmall  farmers,  fcarce  fifty 
are  left,  and  moft  of  them  diftrefied,  unable  to, 
live  at  the  high  price  they  pay  for  what  thev 
buy,  and  the  comparative  low  prices  they  feh 
at.  So  that  a  great  part  of  this  clafs  are  in  a 
ftate  of  dependency,  and  frequently  given  up 
to  drunkennefs.  The  great  farmers  too  often 
copy  the  vices  of  the  gentry.  And  of  the 
thoufand  labouring  men,  five  hundred  are  ex- 
tind  *,  and  of  the  remainder,  not  fifty  have  any 

prOr 


Cc 

¥ 

«  C 

cc 

cc. 

Ci. 

cc 

cc 

<  c 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

cc 

iC 
C  C 

c  c 

•  c 
<  c 
cc 
cc 
cc 

/ 

CC 

cc 

cc 

CC 

cc 


(  94  ) 

property  •.  and  of  the  otliers,  not  ten  have  in- 
diiilry  and  frugality  enough  to  encourage  them 
to  hc^pe  for  property  ;  befides  that  iancfed  pro¬ 
perty  has  got  into  fo  few  hands,  that  it  is  hardly 
to  be  hoped  for,  if  they  had  a  dilpofiticn  to 
aim  fit  It,  IVIoif  ol  theie  latter  are,  therefore, 
in  a  habit  of  living  only  from  hand  to  mouth  ; 
and  the  few  that  ftiil  remain  pofleired  of  pro¬ 
perty,  are  fo  tainted  by  their  example,  that 
mod  of  them  only  fpend  at  the  alehoufe  what 
they  would  otherwife  pay  for  rent :  Whereas 
formerly  the  defire  of  preferving  in  fome,  and  o^ 
acquiring  in  others,  that  property  which  was 
common  among  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  county, 
induced  habits  of  indudry  and  frugality,  the 
mod  favourable  to  marriage,  the  breeding  up 
children,  and  fetting  them  forward  in  the  world 
with  the  like  difpofitions. 

“  It  is  true,  a  great  part  of  the  poor  wretches 
that  are  now  called  labouring  men,  do  marry  ; 
their  children  are  generally  numerous ;  but  po-  ' 
verty  and  vice  carries  mod  of  them  off;  the  ra¬ 
ther,  becaufe,  though  the  county  affords  fubfid- 
encc,  it  does  not  adord  condant  employment  for 
them  ;  confequently,  they  cannot  purchafe  the 
fubfirrence  neccffary  for  themfcdves  and  fami¬ 
lies,  there  not  exifting  now  that  mode  of  life, 
in  which  many  thoufands  did  little  towards  the 
benefit  of  the  community,  but  to  fupport  them- 
felves,  and  breed  children.  Occafional  fupplies  of 
Sccicb  and  others,  give  their  aid,  when  it  is  oc- 
cafionally  wanted,  in  harvcd;  and  the  only  con¬ 
dant  employment  (weaving)  failing  by  degrees, 
in  a  fiiort  time  there  will  probably  be  but  few 
lei  t,  befides  thofc  neceffary  to  till  the  ground  in 
the  expeditious  evay  it  is  now  tilled. 

“  After  all,  perhaps  their  ancedors  were  lefs  in- 
dudrious  tlian  themielves,  yet  they  were  more 

“  frugal. 


(  95  ) 

y  ♦ 

frugal,  and  lefs  licentious  and  debauched  ;  they: 
were,  therefore,  able  with  the  employment  they 
had,  however  little,  to  bring  up  their  families, 
aided  as  they  were  by  the  low  price  of  many  of 
the  neceffaries  of  life*,  and  as  they  fold  but  little, 

“  the  price  of  the  reft  was  of  little  importance  to 
“  them. 

How  far  this  ftate  of  things  in  one  county, 
may  be  fimilar  to  that  in  others,  I  will  not  take  * 
on  myfelf  to  decide.  I  know  fome  counties  are 
improved  both  in  induftry  and  numibers  *,  but 
thus  much  I  will  venture  ^  I  know  it  applies  to 
great  parts  of  Suffolk  and  Effe>:^  and  to  fome 
parts  of  the  w^ft  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  Norfolk 
in  its  prefent  ftate,  is  certainly  more  populous 
than  moft  paj'ts  of  the  kingdom.  For  this  pur- 
pofe  it  is  fufficient  to  appeal  to  the  militia  acls, 
and  the  lifts  in  each  county,  from  which  thefe 
adls  have  been  executed.” 

The  following  obfervations,  written  by  the  fame 
able  hand,  are,  in  my  opinion,  particularly  judi¬ 
cious. 

It  fecms  a  true  propofition,  though  a  morti- 
‘‘  fying  one,  that  a  long  and  vigorous  exertion  of 
commercial  and  military  powers,  however  they 
‘‘  may  contribute  to  the  glory  of  a  nation,  has  a 
tendency  to  wear  out  its  people.  There  is  a 
certain  degree  of  reft  neceffary  to  bodies  politic, 
as  well  as  natural.  Long  foreign  wars,  an  ex- 
penfive  domeftic  government,  high  taxes  in 
confequence  of  both,  luxurious  manners,  and 
oeneral  commerce,  have  concurred  to  diminilh 
the  number  of  our  people,  by  making  it  difficult 
for  any  man  to  live  without  induftry ;  and  almoft 
impoffible  for  a  man  without  property  to  fubfift.a 

“  large  family  at  all. - -Formerly  a  great  part  of 

the  inhabitants  of  the  kingdom  had  no  occafion 


(  9^  ) 


“  to  buy  much  of  the  neceflaries  of  life;  Lctndl 
“  was  in  a  greater  number  of  hands.  Its  produce 
“  fupported  many  thoulands  of  families  without 
“  being  expofed  to  fale.  Many  thoufands  fub- 
“  fifted  on  the  wafte  of  great  families,  who  refaded 
“  conftantly  in  the  country  ;  before  the  Reform¬ 
ation,  on  that  or  monafteries.  Any  man  miehc 
“■  live  in  a  great  meafure  idly  without  vice,  cither 
“  on  his  own  elfate,  or  that  of  another.  A  Imall 
“  part  of  ail  country  produce 'being  brought  to 
“  market,  in  comparifon  of  what  is  now  brou<^hr, 
“  a  large  family  in  a  country  village  might°  be 

“  fupported  with  little  difficulty. - d.Buc  now  al- 

“  moft  every  article  of  fubfiftence  is  brought  to 
“  marker.  Few  of  the  lower  people  hav'e  pro- 
“  petty.  They  muft  buy  what  they  want  or  deal 
“  k,-  for  little  is  given  away.  Even  a  fingle  man 
“  muft  work,  and  the  public  avails  itfclf  of  his  la- 
“  hour,  which  it  could  not  do  in  the  for.mer  ftata 
“  of  things,  againft  his  inclinations  ;  for  he  could 
“  fubfift  with  little  or  no  labour,  if  he  preferred 

the  fo  doing. - If  any  thing  could  compenfate 

“  for  the  lofs  of  inhabitants,  in  other  refpedls 
“  the  lituation  of  the  community  is  certainly 
“  mended  for  it  is  by  the  general  labour  of  all 
“  that  taxes  are  raifed,  and  the  fplendor  and  de- 
fence  of  the  ftate,  as  well  as  the  eafe  of  men  of 
“  property  fupported.  We  muft  nor,  therefore, 
“  repine  at  the  mifchief  that  is  infeparable  from 
“  the  benefit,  unlefs  we  are  willing  to  part  with 
“  the  benefit.  The  political  as  well  as  phyfical 
“  world,  is  compofed  of  an  intimate  mixture  of 
“  good  and  evil,  which  wifdom  can  feldom  fepa- 
“  rate,  though  it  may  often  chufe  between  the 
“  mixtures,  always  fubmitting  to  the  evil  that  is 
“  not  to  be  divided  from  the  good  it  attends,- 
“  though  perhaps  it  may  be  mitigated.  — Labour 


will 


1 


(  97  ) 

will  never  be  tiniverlal  but  by  tiniverfal  compul- 
fion  ;  but  the  unlverfal  compulfion  that  reaches 
“  the  Angle  man,  will  prevent  any  man  from  fub- 
“  filling  a  large  family  :  becaufe  it  can  only  be  the 
‘‘  eflfeft  of  a  high  price  of  provifions  {a)  •,  and  is, 
therefore,  incompatible  with  the  increafe  of  the 
Ipecies*” 

(a)  I  do  not  take  it,  that  provifions  are  properly  to  be  faid 
to  be  fo  high  as  when  the  kingdom  was  more  populous ;  but 
**  it  mull  be  remembered,  that  towns,'  which  were  then  only 
**  afFefted  by  the  price  of  provifions^  contained  a  much  fmaller 
proportion  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  kingdom  than  they  now 
«  do;  and  that  in  the, country  a  great  part  of  the  people 
bought  little,  while  the  prices  of  manufadlures  and  profits 
of  trade  (the  produce  of  towns)  wbe  much  higher  thais 
now.’* 


FINIS. 


y 


D 


Publijhed  by  the  fame  Author, 


|BSERVATIONS  on  Reversionary 
_  Payments  j  on  Schemes  for  providing 
Annuities  for  Widows,  and  Perfons  in  Old  Age ; 
on  the  Method  of  calculating  the  Values  of  Adu- 
rances  on  Lives  ;  and  on  the  National,  Debt, 
To  which  are  added,  Four  Essays  on  dirferent 
Subjeds  in  the  Dodrine  of  Life-Annuities  and 
Political  Arithmetick.  Alfo,  an  Appendix, 
containing  a  complete  Set  of  Tables;  particularly 
four  New  Tables,  fliewing  the  Probabilities  of 
Life  in  London,  Norwich,  and  Northampton; 
and  the  Values  of  two  joint  Lives.  * 

The  Second  Edition,  with  a  Supplement, 
containing  (befides  feveral  New  Tables)  additio¬ 
nal  Obfervations  on  the  Probabilities  of  Human 
Life  in  different  Situations ;  on  the  London  So¬ 
cieties  for  the  Benefit  of  Widows  and  of  Old  Age  j 

and  on  the  prefent  State  of  Population  in  this 
Kingdom. 

n.  A  Review  of  the  principal  Queftions  and 
Difficulties  in  Morals.  Particularly,  thofe  re¬ 
lating  to  the  Original  of  our  Ideas  of  Virtue,  its 
Nature,  Foundation,  Reference  to  the  Deity,  Ob¬ 
ligation,  Subjed-matter,  and  Sandions.  The  Se¬ 
cond  Edition  correded. 


I.  On  Pro- 
III.  On  the 


in.  Four  Dissertations.  — 

yiDENCE. - II.  On  Prayer. — 

Reafons  for  e.xpeding  that  virtuous  Men  ffiall  meet 

alter  Death  in  a  State  of  Happinefs. - IV.  On 

the  Importance  of  Chriftianity,  the  Nature  of  Hi- 

itoncal  Evidence,  and  Miracles.  The  Third 
Edition. 


Printed  for  T.  Cad  ell,  in  the  Strand. 


0 



--- END VERBATIM ---
