LIBRA-BY 

.OF   THE 

Theological   Seminary, 

1'                                                         \  •«  "■•- 

PRINCETON,    N.  J.              ..  *■    •         . 

BX    6559     .17    1866    v. 5                    ^ 
Irving,    Edward,     1792-183A. 
The    collected   writings    of 

Edward    Irving 

EDWARD  IRVING'S  WRITINGS 


VOL.  V, 


THE  COLLECTED  WRITINGS 

/ 
OF  EDWARD  IRVING 


Edited  by  his  Nephew,  the  Rev.  G.  CARLYLE,  M.A. 


IN  FIVE    VOLUMES— VOL.    V. 


ALEXANDER    STRAHAN,    PUBLISHER 

L  O  N  D  ()  N    AND    N  E  W    YORK 
1866 


CONTENTS. 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  INCARNATION 
OPENED. 

PAGK 

PREFACE,  ........  3 

EPISTLE  DEDICATORY,  ......  7 


I. 

THAT  THE  BEGINNING  OR  ORIGIN  OF  THE  MYSTERY,  THAT  THE 
ETERNAL  WORD  SHOULD  TAKE  UNTO  HIMSELF  A  BODY,  IS 
THE  HOLY  WILL  AND  GOOD  PLEASURE  OF  GOD, 


II. 

THE  END  OF  THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  INCARNATION  IS  THE  GLORY 

OF  GOD,  ........     59 

Part     I.  By  Manifestation. 
Part    II.   By  Action. 

III. 

THE  METHOD  IS  BY  TAKING  UP  THE  FALLEN  HUMANITY,  .  1 14 

Part      I.   The  Composition  of  Christ's  Person. 

Part    II.   The  Universal  Reconciliation  wrought  by  His  Death,  and  the 

Particular  Election  ministered  by  His  Life  in  Glory. 
Part  III.   The  Removal  of  the  Law,  and  the  bringing  in  of  Grace. 
Part  IV.   Conclusions. 
VOL.  V.  b 


vi  CONTENTS. 


IV. 


THE  CHURCH. 


PAGE 


THE  PREPARATION   FOR,  AND   THE  VERY  ACT  OF,  THE  INCARNA- 
TION OF  CHRIST,  .....  258 

Part     I.  The  Humiliation  in  Flesh  unto  Death. 
Part    II.  The  Descent  into  Hell. 


V. 

THE  FRUITS  OF  THE  INCARNATION,  .  .  .  ,312 

Part     I.  Grace  and  Peace. 

Part    II.  The  Promulgation  or  Preaching  of  the  same. 

Part  III.  The  Personal  Application  of  the  same. 


VI. 

CONCLUSIONS  CONCERNING  THE  SUBSISTENCE  OF  GOD,  AND  THE 
SUBSISTENCE  OF  THE  CREATURE,  DERIVED  FROM  REFLECT- 
ING UPON  THE  INCARNATION,    .....  398 


THE    CHURCH,    WITH     HER     ENDOWMENT     OF     HOLINESS     AND 

POWER,     ....  ...  449 


ON  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

ON  THE  GIFTS  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST   COMMONLY  CALLED   SUPER- 
NATURAL, .......  509 


APPENDIX. 

APPENDIX  TO  THE  TREATISE  ON  THE  INCARNATION,  .  .  563 


THE   DOCTRINE   OF    THE 
INCARNATION  OPENED 


IN  SIX  SERMONS. 


VOL.  V. 


PREFACE, 


'"T'HESE  Sermons  on  the  Incarnation  were  intended  to  open  that 
mystery  after  a  dogmatical,  and  not  a  controversial,  method ; 
as  being  designed  for  the  instruction  of  the  church  committed  to 
my  ministerial  and  pastoral  care,  of  whom  I  knew  not  that  any  one 
entertained  a  doubt  upon  that  great  head  of  Christian  faith.  To 
open  the  subject  in  all  its  bearings,  and  to  connect  it  with  the  other 
great  heads  of  Divine  doctrine,  especially  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  and  to  shew  the  several  offices  of  the  Divine  persons,  in  the 
great  work  of  making  the  Word  flesh ;  this  truly  was  the  good  pur- 
pose with  which  I  undertook  and  completed  the  four  sermons  upon 
the  Origin,  the  End,  the  Act,  and  the  Fruit  of  the  Incarnation, 
When  I  had  completed  this  office  of  my  ministry,  and,  by  the  re- 
quest of  my  flock,  had  consented  to  the  publication  of  these  discourses  j 
and  when  the  printing  of  them  had  all  but,  or  altogether,  concluded ; 
there  arose,  I  say  not  by  what  influence  of  Satan,  a  great  outcry  against 
the  doctrine  which,  with  all  orthodox  churches,  I  hold  and  maintain 
concerning  the  person  of  Christ:  the  doctrine,  I  mean,  of  His  human 
nature,  that  it  was  manhood  fallen,  which  He  took  up  into  His  Divine 
person,  in  order  to  prove  the  grace  and  the  might  of  Godhead  in 
redeeming  it ;  or,  to  use  the  words  of  our  Scottish  Confession,  that 
His  flesh  was,  in  its  proper  nature,  mortal  and  corruptible,  but  received 
immortality  and  incorruption  from  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  stir  which 
was  made  in  divers  quarters,  both  of  this  and  my  native  land,  about 
this  matter,  as  if  it  were  neither  the  orthodox  doctrine  of  the  Church, 
nor  a  doctrine  according  to  godliness,  shewed  me,  who  am  convinced 
of  both,  that  it  was  necessary  to  take  controversial  weapons  in  my 
hand,  and  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  as  it  was  once  delivered  to 
the  saints.  I  perceived  now,  that  the  dogmatical  method  which  I  had 
adopted  for  the  behoof  of  my  own  believing  flock,  would  not  be  suffi- 
cient ^^'hcn  publishing  to  a  wavering,  gainsaying,  or  unbelieving  people; 


4  PREFA  CE, 

and  therefore  it  seemed  to  me  most  profitable  to  delay  the  publication 
until  I  should  have  composed  something  fitted  to  re-establish  men's 
minds  upon  this  great  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  Church ;  which 
having  done,  I  resolved  to  insert  the  same  as  two  other  sermons — the  one 
upon  the  method  of  the  incarnation,  and  the  other  upon  the  relations 
of  the  Creator  and  the  creature,  as  these  are  shewn  out  in  the  light  of 
the  incarnation.  And  for  this  timeous  interruption  by  evil  tongues,  I 
desire  to  give  thanks  to  God,  inasmuch  as  I  have  been  enabled  thereby 
not  only  to  expound,  but  to  defend  the  faith,  that  the  Son  of  God 
came  in  the  flesh. 

I  would  not  add  another  word  upon  this  subject,  were  it  not  that  I 
know  how  ready  the  ear  of  this  generation  is  to  take  up  an  evil  report, 
and  how  much  it  doth  prejudice  a  man  to  be  even  suspected  of  a  great 
vital  error  in  his  faith.  Therefore,  to  set  myself  straight  with  honest- 
hearted  men,  who  may  have  been  poisoned  by  malicious  ^slanders,  I 
will  state,  in  a  few  words,  what  is  the  exact  matter  in  dispute  between 
us  and  these  gainsayers  of  the  truth. 

The  point  at  issue  is  simply  this :  "Whether  Christ's  flesh  had  the 
grace  of  sinlessness  and  incorruption  from  its  proper  nature,  or  from 
the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  say  the  latter.  I  assert,  that  in 
its  proper  nature  it  was  as  the  flesh  of  His  mother,  but,  by  virtue  of 
the  Holy  Ghost's  quickening  and  inhabiting  of  it,  it  was  preserved  sin- 
less and  incorruptible.  This  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  further  assert, 
was  done  in  consequence  of  the  Son's  humbling  Himself  to  be  made 
flesh.  The  Son  said,  "  I  come  : "  the  Father  said,  "  I  prepare  Thee  a 
body  to  come  in :  "  and  the  Holy  Ghost  prepared  that  body  out  of 
the  Virgin's  substance.  And  so,  by  the  threefold  acting  of  the  Trinity, 
was  the  Christ  constituted  a  Divine  and  a  human  nature,  joined  in 
personal  union  for  ever.  This  I  hold  to  have  been  the  orthodox  faith 
of  the  Christian  Church  in  all  ages  :  it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Scottish 
Church,  expressed  in  these  words  of  the  twenty-first  article :  "  As  the 
eternal  Godhead  hath  given  to  the  flesh  of  Christ  Jesus,  which  of  its 
own  nature  was  mortal  and  corruptible,  life  and  immortality,"  Sec. 
And,  moreover,  I  assert,  that  the  opposite  of  this  doctrine,  which 
affirmeth  Christ's  flesh  to  have  been  in  itself  immortal  and  incorrup- 
tible, or  in  any  way  diverse  from  this  flesh  of  mine,  without  respect 
had  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  a  pestilent  heresy,  which  coming  in  will 
root  out  atonement,  redemption,  regeneration,  the  work  of  the  Spirit, 
and  the  human  nature  of  Christ  altogether.  Now,  I  glory  that  God 
hath  accounted  me  worthy  to  appear  in  the  field  of  this  ancient  con- 
troversy, which  I  hold  to  be  the  foundation-stone  of  the  edifice  of 


PREFACE.  5 

orthodox  truth.  With  all  this  I  hold  the  human  will  of  Christ  to 
have  been  perfectly  holy,  and  to  have  acted,  spoken,  or  wished  nothing 
but  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  will  of  the  Godhead  5  which,  to  dis- 
tinguish it  from  the  creature  will.  He  calleth  the  will  of  the  Father : 
for  that  there  were  two  wills  in  Christ,  the  one  the  absolute  will  of 
the  Godhead,  the  other  the  limited  will  of  the  manhood,  the  Church 
hath  ever  maintained  as  resolutely  as  that  there  were  two  natures. 
These  two  wills,  I  maintain,  were  always  concentric  or  harmonious 
with  each  other,  and  the  work  achieved  by  the  Godhead  through  the 
incarnation  of  Christ  was  neither  less  nor  more  than  this,  to  bring  the 
will  of  the  creature,  which  had  erred  from  the  Divine  will,  back  again 
to  be  harmonious  with  the  Divine  will,  and  there  to  fix  it  for  ever. 
This  is  the  redemption,  this  is  the  at-one-ment,  which  was  wrought  in 
Christ,  to  redeem  the  will  of  a  creature  from  the  oppression  of  sin, 
and  bring  it  to  be  at  one  with  the  will  of  the  Creator.  All  divinity, 
all  Divine  operation,  all  God's  purpose,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end- 
ing of  time,  and  throughout  eternal  ages,  resteth  upon  this  one  truth, 
that  every  acting  of  the  human  nature  of  Christ  was  responsive  to,  and 
harmonious  with,  the  actings  of  the  Divine  will  of  the  Godhead. 
What  a  calamity  it  is  then,  what  a  hideous  lie,  to  represent  us  as  mak- 
ing Christ  unholy  and  sinful,  because  we  maintain  that  He  took  His 
humanity  completely  and  wholly  from  the  substance,  from  the  sinful 
substance,  of  the  fallen  creatures  which  He  came  to  redeem  !  He  was 
passive  to  every  sinful  suggestion  which  the  world  through  the  flesh 
can  hand  up  unto  the  will  j  He  was  liable  to  every  sinful  suggestion 
which  Satan  through  the  mind  can  hand  up  to  the  will  j  and  with  all 
such  suggestions  and  temptations,  I  believe  Him  beyond  all  others 
to  have  been  assailed,  but  further  went  they  not.  He  gave  them  no 
inlet.  He  went  not  to  seek  them.  He  gave  them  no  quarter,  but  with 
power  Divine  rejected  and  repulsed  them  all ;  and  so,  from  His  con- 
ception unto  His  resurrection.  His  whole  life  was  a  series  of  active 
triumphings  over  sin  in  the  flesh,  Satan  in  the  world,  and  spiritual 
wickednesses  in  high  places.  If  now,  after  this  honest  and  true  state- 
ment of  the  issue,  any  one  will  advance  to  the  perusal  of  this  treatise 
on  the  incarnation  with  a  prejudice  against  the  orthodox  truth,  or 
against  me  its  expounder,  be  the  guilt  of  the  breach  of  charity  on  his 
own  head ;  and  may  God  deal  with  him  better  than  he  deserves ! 

I  commend  my  book  unto  Thy  patronage,  O  Thou  Enlightener  of 
every  man  who  cometh  into  the  world  !  I  submit  my  work  unto  the 
review  and  censure  of  that  righteous  judgment  which  shall  yet  be 
holden  upon  all  the  works  of  all  men  j  and  meanwhile  unto  Thee,  O 


6  PREFACE. 

Holy  Spirit,  whose  minister  I  am,  I  offer  these  various  thoughts  and 
counsels,  that  Thou  mayest  use  them  for  the  sake  of  the  faithful  in 
Christ  Jesus,  whom  I  love  in  my  heart,  and  for  whom  I  desire  patiently 
to  bear  all  pains  and  travails  of  this  mortal  estate.  And,  O  Father  of 
my  spirit,  I  fervently  pray  unto  Thee,  that  Thou  wouldest  in  Thy 
great  mercy  forgive  whatever,  in  these  and  all  my  writings,  may  be 
inharmonious  with  Thy  only  holy  mind,  or  derogatory  from  the  honour 
and  glory  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son,  or  vexatious  and  hindersome  to 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  remembering  not  the  sins  of  Thy  servant, 
neither  suffering  them  to  make  the  least  of  Thy  little  ones  to  offend. 
Amen  and  amen. 


EPISTLE    DEDICATORY. 


TO  MY  FLOCK  AND  CONGREGATION. 

Dearly  Beloved  in  the  Lord, 
n^HESE  Sermons  on  the  Incarnation,  and  the  most  orthodox  and 
wholesome  doctrine  therein  set  forth,  you  received  with  all  accepta- 
tion: and  the  Elders  u'hom  God  hath  set  over  you  made  choice  of  them 
to  stand  first  in  these  volumes,  which  I  now  publish  for  the  edification 
of  the  body  of  Christ.  To  you,  therefore,  over  ivhom  the  Lord  hath 
made  us  overseers,  I  do  offer  these  fruits  of  my  meditation  and  ministry 
on  your  behalf;  and  I  entreat  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  whose 
act  of  surpassing  love  they  are  intended  to  unfold,  that  you  would 
receive  them  with  favour  and  qff'ection  from  the  hand  of  your  Pastor 
and  Teacher,  who  loveth  you  much.  I  cannot  refrain,  dearly  beloved, 
from  expressing  to  you  all  the  growing  attachment  which  I  feel  towards 
you,  because  of  your  patient  hearing  of  the  ivhole  testimony  of  God, 
and  your  observance  of  His  holy  ordinances,  and  reverence  for  the 
persons  of  us  who  administer  the  same;  ofid  I  entreat  you,  in  the 
several  stations  appointed  to  you  of  God,  to  be  faithful  witnesses  for 
Christ  until  His  coming  ;  standing  fast  together  in  faith  and  love  and 
a  good  conscience,  with  your  loins  girt  and  your  lamps  burning,  as 
those  who  wait  for  His  appearing. 


8  EPISTLE  DEDICATORY. 

May  the  great  Bishop  and  Shepherd  of  your  souls  feed  you  with  the 
bread  of  life  all  the  days  of  your  earthly  pilgrimage,  and  receive  you  at 
length  unto  His  kingdom  and  glory. 

Your  affectionate  and  dutiful  Pastor, 

EDWARD  IRVING. 

Nov.  lo,  1828. 


PEIITGETOXNf  ^' 


THE    DOCTRINE    OF    THE 
INCARNATION  OPENED. 


I. 

THAT  THE  BEGINNING  OR  ORIGIN  OF  THE  MYSTERY,  THAT 
THE  ETERNAL  WORD  SHOULD  TAKE  UNTO  HIMSELF  A 
BODY,  IS  THE  HOLY  WILL  AND  GOOD  PLEASURE  OF  GOD. 

Psalm  xl.  6-8. 

Sacrifice  and  offering  thoic  didst  not  desire;  mine  ears  hast  thou  opened:  bw-nt- 
offering  and  sin-offering  hast  thoic  not  required.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come :  in 
the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me,  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God : 
yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart. 

"r\EARLY  beloved  brethren,  on  this  day  which  we  have 
set  apart  for  shewing  forth  the  Lord's  death  by  the 
sacrament  of  the  supper,  I  consider  it  to  be  due  unto  His  hon- 
our, and  a  right  acknowledgment  of  our  faith,  that  we  should 
begin  to  meditate,  and  to  set  forth  in  order,  the  great  work  of 
His  incarnation,  and  the  benefits  which  flow  thence  into  our 
souls  ;  to  the  end  that,  when  God  beholdeth  us  to  be  of  one 
mind  and  spirit  to  honour  and  glorify  His  Son,  He  may  be  well 
pleased  in  us,  and  make  Himself  known  to  us  in  the  breaking 
of  bread.  And  may  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  receiveth  of  the 
things  of  Christ  to  shew  them  unto  us,  at  this  time  so  anoint 
us  all  with  His  holy  unction  of  truth,  that  we  may  be  able  to 
search  into  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  to  present  them  for 
the  edification  of  the  Church,  which  is  His  body,  the  fulness  of 
Him  who  filleth  all  in  all. 


lo  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

The  immediate  cause  of  the  incarnation,  was  the  fall  of  man 
and  the  consequent  invasion  of  sin,  and  subjection  of  all  earthly- 
things  to  the  prince  of  darkness.  I  say  that  this  was  the  im- 
mediate cause,  or,  as  we  may  say,  the  occasion  of  it :  for,  if 
man  had  not  fallen,  there  would  never  have  been  upon  this 
earth  any  such  event  as  the  incarnation,  whereof  the  first  fruit 
is  to  recover  that  which  Adam  lost,  and,  at  the  least,  to  re- 
instate mankind  and  their  habitation  in  that  condition  wherein 
they  were  created.  This  fall  of  man  was  also  the  formal  cause 
of  the  incarnation  ;  that  is  to  say,  what  gave  to  the  purpose  of 
God  its  outward  form  and  character,  requiring  His  Son  to  take 
upon  Him  the  nature  of  man,  and  not  of  angels,  to  be  under 
the  law,  and  to  bear  the  curse  of  death,  as  it  is  written,  (Heb. 
ii.  14,  15,)  "Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of 
flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the 
same ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver  them  who 
through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bond- 
age." But,  if  we  would  ascend  to  the  first  cause  of  this  great 
act  of  the  Godhead,  we  must  seek  it  in  God  himself,  who 
worketh  all  things  after  the  pleasure  of  His  own  will,  and  to 
the  praise  of  His  own  glory.  The  fall  of  man  was  not  an  acci- 
dent which  fell  out  against  the  disposition  and  to  the  hindrance 
of  God's  universal  and  all-including  schemeof  creation,  and  pro- 
vidence, and  grace :  but  though  the  will  of  man  was  free — that 
is,  under  his  own  single  control,  and  not  in  bondage  of  a  stronger 
as  now  it  is, — yet  was  the  act  of  his  disobedience  both  known 
and  foreseen,  and  permitted  of  God,  though  not  in  such  a  way 
as  to  overrule,  or  constrain,  or  in  any  way  to  bias  his  mind  to 
evil,  but  all  the  contrary.  And  as  it  was  foreseen,  so  was  it  pro- 
vided for  ;  and  as  it  was  permitted,  so  was  it  overruled  for  the 
greater  glory  and  honour  of  the  most  holy  and  righteous  God, 
and  for  the  total  and  eternal  extinction  and  abolition  of  the 
active  power  of  sin.  Therefore  is  it  most  necessary  to  reach  to  a 
higher  and  more  remote  source  than  the  fall,  or  even  the  crea- 
tion of  our  first  parents,  in  order  to  attain  unto  the  great 
and  first  cause  of  the  mystery  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  And  the  rule  is  general,  that  we 
must  wholly  disentangle  every  spiritual  subject  from  the  con- 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         1 1 

ditions  of  space  and  time,  which  are  only  the  forms  of  its 
manifestation,  ere  we  can  arrive  at  its  proper  bearings,  or 
handle  it  in  a  way  profitable  to  the  spiritual  life. 

Accordingly,  it  is  written  concerning  this  mystery  of  the 
incarnation,  in  various  parts  of  Scripture,  that  it  came  not 
within  the  coasts  of  time,  but  had  its  origin  before  the  foun- 
dation of  the  world.  In  the  beginning  of  his  Gospel,  the  tes- 
timony of  John  is  given  to  this  effect,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  :"  concerning 
which  Lamb  he  testifies,  in  the  13th  chapter  of  the  Revela- 
tion, verse  8,  that  He  was  "  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world  ;"  "whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  of 
the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  But 
lest  any  one  should  say  that  this  doth  carry  the  offering  of 
Christ  only  to,  and  not  beyond  the  foundation  of  the  world,  I 
have  Christ's  testimony  concerning  Himself  in  the  17th  chap- 
ter of  John  :  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast 
given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am  ;  that  they  may  behold  my 
glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me  :  for  thou  lovedst  me  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  Sanctify  them  through  thy 
truth  :  thy  word  is  truth."  And  lest  this  should  be  inter- 
preted of  the  Father's  love  to  Him  anterior  to,  and  indepen- 
dent of  His  mediatorial  office,  (although  it  is,  to  my  mind, 
nothing  less  than  an  absurdity  and  contradiction  to  imagine 
that  the  Father  can  contemplate  His  Son  otherwise  than  in 
the  fulness  of  all  His  offices,  there  being  no  application  of 
time  to  the  Godhead,)  I  have  to  shew  you  a  passage  in  the 
1st  Epistle  of  Peter,  which  places  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lamb, 
yea,  and  the  foreordination  and  appointment  of  it,  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world :  "  Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  ye 
were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold, 
from  your  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  your 
fathers ;  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot ;  who  verily  was  fore- 
ordained before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but  was  manifest 
in  these  last  times  for  you."  In  which  idea  that  the  apostles 
were  rooted  and  grounded,  you  cannot  read  one  of  their  epistles 
without  perceiving  ;  where  you  shall  find  that  it  is  not  in  the 
fall  of  man  they  date  the  origin  of  our  redemption,  but  in  the 


1 2  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

eternal  counsel  of  God,  which  He  purposed  in  Himself  before 
the  world  began,  as  it  is  written,  (2  Tim.  i.  9,)  "  Who  hath 
saved  us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling,  not  according  to 
our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which 
was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began  ;  but  is 
now  made  manifest  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  who  hath  abolished  death,  and  hath  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel."  In  which  passage, 
that  which  is  seen  and  temporal  with  respect  to  the  Messiah, 
is  regarded  merely  as  the  manifestation  of  that  purpose  which 
the  Godhead  had  purposed  in  Himself  before  the  world  was, 
before  any  world  was  ;  all  good  purposes  being  ever  present 
with  Him,  and  the  execution  of  them  all  ever  seen  in  the 
fulness  of  THE  WORD,  contemplated  in  Him  as  their  great 
architect,  and  fabricator,  and  upholder.  But  the  full  develop- 
ment of  this  doctrine  is  to  be  found  written  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Ephesians  ;  of  which  Paul  himself  doth  witness  the  great 
depth,  saying,  that  when  we  read  it,  we  may  understand  his 
knowledge  in  the  mystery  of  Christ.  If  you  read  with  me, 
at  the  third  verse  of  the  first  chapter,  you  will  find  that  the 
apostle  carries  us  out  of  place ;  at  verse  4,  out  of  time  ;  at 
verse  5,  out  of  the  present  age  ;  and  at  verse  6,  out  of  all  ex- 
ternal cause  ;  at  verse  7,  he  rehearseth  the  act  of  its  revela- 
tion in  time  ;  and  in  verses  8-10,  consummates  the  act ;  in 
verse  11,  he  takes  in  the  personal  interest  in,  and  in  verse  12 
he  shews  the  end  of,  the  purpose. 

The  doctrine,  therefore,  concerning  the  incarnation,  upon 
which  the  primitive  Church  was  founded  by  the  apostles,  and 
to  which  the  Reformers  brought  us  back,  and  from  which  we 
are  fast  swerving  again,  is  this — That  it  is  a  great  purpose  of 
the  Divine  will  which  God  was  minded  from  all  eternity  to 
miake  known  unto  His  creatures,  for  their  greater  information, 
delight,  and  blessedness ;  to  make  known,  I  say,  to  all  His  in- 
telligent creatures,  the  grace  and  mercy,  the  forgiveness  and 
love  which  He  beareth  towards  those  who  love  the  honour 
of  His  Son,  and  believe  in  the  word  of  His  testimony.  In 
order  that  thereby  His  children,  comprehending  more  fully 
the  beauty  and  loveliness  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  might  desire 
Him  the  more,  and  cleave  unto  Him  with  an  entire  fidelity. 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         13 

Which  aspect,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of  the  Divine  character,  could 
never  be  beheld  by  a  creature  unfallen  ;  forasmuch  as  grace, 
and  mercy,  and  forgiveness,  do  necessarily  presuppose  and 
require  guilt,  and  offence,  and  hatefulness,  for  the  objects 
upon  which  to  put  themselves  forth,  as  necessarily  as  the 
power,  and  wisdom,  and  order,  and  harmony  of  creation  re- 
quire a  chaos,  and  confusion,  and  darkness  which  they  may 
adorn,  and  order,  and  bless.  And  as  God  did  not  at  once 
command  the  created  world  to  come  forth  as  we  now  behold 
it,  but  first  permitted  a  chaos  which  was  without  form  and 
void,  in  order  that  by  successive  acts  of  wisdom  and  good- 
ness, He  might  order  it  into  beauty  and  light;  so  also  did  He 
permit  that  in  the  moral  part  of  His  works  there  should  be  a 
rebellion,  and  darkness,  and  disobedience,  in  order  that  by 
successive  acts  of  compelling  grace,  He  might  lead  out  the 
harmony  and  unity  of  all  His  chosen,  "  against  the  dispensation 
of  the  fulness  of  the  times  when  He  shall  gather  together  in 
one  all  things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in  the  heavens  and 
which  are  on  the  earth."  And  in  thus  proceeding.  He  doth 
manifest  the  grace  or  favour  which  He  beareth  even  to  sinners 
who  honour  His  Son,  giving  His  Son  thereby  a  very  great 
exaltation  before  the  heavenly  host,  when  they  perceive  that 
for  His  sake  the  Father  of  all  can  forgive  sin.  This,  then,  you 
will  bear  in  mind,  that  the  incarnation  of  His  Son  is  the  way 
by  which  God  revealeth  that  more  tender  aspect  of  His  being 
called  grace — that  part  of  the  Divine  substance  which  could 
not  otherwise  have  been  made  known.  And  therefore  the 
gospel  is  called  a  mystery,  because  it  was  long  hid  to  all,  and 
is  yet  in  a  great  measure  hid  unto  all,  being  still  only  in  the 
act  and  progress  of  unfolding  itself  Abraham  had  a  distant 
prospect  of  it,  and  Moses  had  a  material  model  of  it,  the 
psalmist  a  royal  foretaste  of  it,  and  the  prophets  a  national 
manifestation  of  it,  which  yet  themselves  understood  not, 
though  they  believed  ;  and  our  Lord  verified  Abraham's  dis- 
tant view,  substantiated  Moses's  shadow,  answered  part  of  the 
predictions  of  the  psalms  and  the  prophets,  prepared  the  way 
of  the  Spirit  to  open  the  mystery  more  perfectly  to  the  apos- 
tles, and  promised  that  He  would  come  again  to  manifest, 
clear  up,  and  accomplish  what  still  lay  shrouded  in  the  mys- 


14  THE  INCARNATION: 

tery :  and  this  we  look  for  Him  to  accomplish  against  the 
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  the  times.     And  to  this  agree 
the  words  of  the  apostle,  when  speaking  of  the  insight  which 
had  been  given  unto  him,  as  you  find  in   Eph.  iii.  4-6 — 
"  Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye  may  understand  my  knowledge 
in  the  mystery  of  Christ ;  which  in  other  ages  was  not  made 
known  unto  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto  his 
holy  apostles  and  prophets  by  the  Spirit ;  that  the  Gentiles 
should  be  fellow-heirs,  and  of  the  same  body,  and  partakers 
of  his  promise  in  Christ  by  the  gospel."    And  further,  in  verses 
8-1 1 — "  Unto  me,  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is 
this  grace  given,  that  I  should  preach  among  the  Gentiles  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ ;  and  to  make  all  men  see  what 
is  the  fellowship  of  the  mystery,  which  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world  hath  been  hid  in  God,  who  created  all  things  by 
Jesus  Christ :  to  the  intent  that  now  unto  the  principalities 
and  powers  in  heavenly  places  might  be  known  by  the  church 
the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  according  to  the  eternal  purpose 
which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."     Upon  which 
word  "  now,"  I  remark,  that  we,  that  the  principalities  and 
powers  in  heavenly  places,  that  all  created  beings,  shall  have 
no  other  revelation  than  we  now  possess  in  the  Church  con- 
cerning the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  ;  though,  as  it  opens 
more  and  more,  and  is  by  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  un- 
sealed more  and  more,  it  shall  be  more  and  more  discovered 
what  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  hid  in  Jesus 
Christ,  in  whom  it  hath  pleased  the  Father  that  all  fulness 
should  dwell,  according  as  we  find  it  written  in  the  7th  verse 
of  the  2d  chapter  of  the  same  epistle — "  That  in  the  ages  to 
come  he  might  shew  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace,  in  his 
kindness  towards  us  through  Christ  Jesus." 

Take  this,  therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  for  the  true  prin- 
ciple of  the  work  of  the  incarnation,  that  it  was  a  purpose 
which  God  purposed  in  Himself,  to  make  known  by  Jesus 
Christ,  and  by  all  who  shall  honour  and  cleave  to  Him,  the 
riches  of  His  grace  and  mercy  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  And 
taking  this  for  the  true  account  of  the  matter,  be  comforted 
and  strengthened  and  edified,  in  knowing  that  there  is  nothing 
accidental  nor  circumstantial  in  the  work  of  your  redemption. 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         1 5 

but  that  it  is  complete  in  Him  in  whom  ye  beheve  and  trust ; 
— that  as  the  men  are  carried  safe  who  cleave  unto  the  life- 
boat, while  the  men  that  rashly  commit  themselves  to  the 
billows  are  dashed  to  pieces,  or,  to  keep  to  the  sacred  emblem, 
as  the  souls  who  believed  Noah  and  took  refuge  in  the  ark 
were  saved,  while  all  the  rest  perished,  so  you  have  nothing 
to  fear  if  ye  cleave  to  Christ,  and  resign  yourselves  to  the 
shelter  of  His  brooding  wings.  Oh,  our  fathers  knew  the  com- 
fort of  this  doctrine  of  the  unconditional,  uncircumstantial,  un- 
accidental,  the  substantial,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  election 
in  Christ  Jesus ;  and,  receiving  it,  they  grew  into  His  simili- 
tude, and  were  strengthened  to  do  works  worthy  of  His  holi- 
ness. But  we  have  confounded  the  security  of  the  Divine 
purpose  which  includeth  the  Church,  and  embraceth  every 
spirit  which  believeth  in  Jesus,  and  which  is  the  argument  for 
believing  in  Him,  that  we  may  be  so  kept  in  safety  for  ever ; 
this  have  we  confounded  by  looking  continually  at  the  varie- 
ties of  the  moods  and  frames  of  the  natural  man,  and  chang- 
ing conditions  of  the  visible  Church,  which  have  no  more  to  do 
with  the  constancy  of  that  purpose  in  which  we  are  wrapped 
up  with  Jesus,  than  this  changing  atmosphere  and  cloudy 
canopy  over  our  heads  hath  to  do  with  the  fixed  stars  of 
heaven,  and  the  constant  light  and  heat  of  the  glorious  sun. 

So  much  have  I  to  say  in  the  general  way  which  one  topic 
of  a  discourse  can  contain,  concerning  the  first  and  great  cause 
of  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
now  I  pray  you  to  observe  these  two  things,  which  naturally 
flow  from  what  hath  been  said : — 

First,  In  order  that  God  might  not  be  the  cause  of  sin,  and 
so  all  ideas  of  good  and  evil  become  confounded,  it  was  pro- 
per, as  from  His  own  essential  goodness  it  was  necessary,  that 
every  creature  which  His  finger  framed  should  be  made  per- 
fect in  its  kind,  fit  to  shadow  forth  some  portion  of  the  Crea- 
tor's worthiness,  and  to  execute  some  part  of  His  all-consistent 
and  all-gracious  will.  Wherefore  every  creature  being  framed 
obedient  to  a  good  law  and  blessed  in  the  obedience  of  the 
same,  it  must  follow  that  if  any  creature  fall  from  its  primi- 
tive condition  and  frame  of  righteousness,  it  must  do  so  by 


1 6  THE  INCARNATION: 

positive  transgression  of  that  ordinance  under  which  it  was 
placed  by  its  Creator,  and  therein  held  by  strong  obligations 
and  inducements,  yet  by  no  means  so  strong  as  to  preclude  a 
fall,  which  were  infallibility  itself  and  unchangeableness, — a 
state  of  being  which  pertaineth,  as  I  conceive,  at  present  to 
God  only,  but  unto  which  all  the  redeemed  are  working  their 
way,  with  all  those  heavenly  and  earthly  things  which,  in  the 
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times,  are  in  Christ  Jesus  to  be 
gathered  together  into  one.  I  mean  to  say,  that  we  have  no 
tidings,  nor  records,  nor,  as  I  think,  ideas  of  any  unchange- 
able but  the  One  unchangeable,  the  I  AM,  and  therefore  we 
ought  not  to  wonder  that  angels  and  mankind  should  fall,  or 
impute  their  fall  unto  God  the  Creator,  because  He  had  fore- 
seen the  occurrence  thereof,  and  taken  measures  that  there 
should  thence  redound  glory  to  Himself  in  the  highest,  peace 
on  earth,  and  good-will  to  the  children  of  men,  new  faithful- 
ness and  delight  to  the  morning  stars  and  the  angels  of  God. 
The  fall  of  the  creatures  therefore  involveth  guilt,  and  that  of 
the  deepest  dye,  if  indeed  there  be  deeper  and  deeper  dyes  of 
guilt ;  which,  though  it  be  a  true  idea  to  a  creature  already  in 
a  fallen  state,  is  not  so,  as  I  take  it,  to  a  creature  who  hath  not 
fallen,  in  whom  any  insurrection  of  the  will,  or  disobedience  of 
the  act,  doth  constitute  the  very  essence  and  substance  of  sin, 
which  may  afterwards  be  varied  by  particular  accidents,  but 
cannot,  as  I  take  it,  be  changed  in  its  essence.  Now,  brethren, 
when  guilt  had  been  incurred,  as  it  appeareth  that  it  must 
occur  in  the  fall  of  any  creature,  how  is  that  creature  to  be 
delivered  from  under  the  state  of  guilt  ?  How  is  the  Almighty 
in  shewing  forth  His  love  and  mercy  to  the  unfallen,  and 
revealing  that  other  aspect  of  Himself,  to  approach  this  guilty 
creature  who  hath  flown  off  to  wander  in  the  evil  and  errone- 
ous maze  of  an  independent  will.  This  is  the  question  which 
ignorance  and  presumption  and  wickedness  findeth  no  ques- 
tion, but  resolveth  into  God's  indiscriminate  mercy;  but  which 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  modesty,  findeth  the  mystery 
of  mysteries,  the  perplexity  of  perplexities  ; — insomuch,  that 
the  very  wisest  of  the  heathen  did  say,  he  believed  God  would, 
in  the  time  He  judged  best,  send  forth  some  one  from  Himself 
to  teach  mankind  that  mystery  of  mysteries,  how  a  holy  God 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         1 7 

could  pardon  sin.  If  it  can  be  done,  it  can  be  declared  ;  but 
the  difficulty  lieth  all  in  the  accomplishment  of  it.  For  it 
would  ill  answer  either  the  end  of  the  Creator  or  the  wellbeing 
of  His  creatures,  that  He  should  make  known  that  new  and 
tenderer  aspect  of  His  character,  which  is  grace,  at  the  ex- 
pense and  obliteration  of  that  other,  which  is  righteousness. 
This  would  make  the  Father  of  lights  to  be  a  changing  and 
revolving  light  ;  whereas  He  is  the  Father  of  lights,  in  whom 
there  is  no  variableness  nor  shadow  of  turning.  Besides,  it  is 
in  virtue  of  His  holiness  that  sin  is  sin  ;  for  if  you  take  away 
the  holiness  of  God,  all  distinction  is  for  ever  confounded; 
and  seeing  the  sinning  creature  is  the  evidence  and  token  of 
His  holiness,  if  that  sinning  creature  were  to  be  pardoned  by 
a  single  act  of  love,  love  would  have  strangled  holiness ;  or 
there  would  be  a  reign  now  of  holiness,  then  of  love,  and  no 
one  could  say  when  there  might  be  another  shift  from  love  to 
holiness  :  and  therefore,  such  an  arbitrary  redemption,  even  if 
possible,  would  be  no  redemption  to  be  depended  on. 

Wherefore,  in  the  love,  the  holiness  must  shine  forth,  as  the 
light  of  the  sun  shineth  forth  in  company  with  his  heat.  The 
new  manifestation  of  Jehovah's  being  must  illustrate  the  old, 
not  cast  it  into  the  shade.  The  new  knowledge  must  be  the 
old  waxed  more  clear  and  manifest ;  no  extinction  nor  oblite- 
ration thereof     And  therefore  I  observe — 

Secondly,  That  seeing,  not  to  drive  all  order  within  the 
universe  into  confusion,  and  all  integrity  into  distraction, 
and  put  all  righteousness  to  shame,  there  must  be  with  the 
Divine  Power  a  faculty  of  preserving  holiness,  and  of  forgiv- 
ing sin,  I  am  at  my  wit's-end  to  know  how  :  here  I  stand  non- 
plussed, my  faculty  of  reason  serving  me  not  a  jot.  If  I 
could  conceive  of  sin  as  an  accidental  thing,  which  an  acci- 
dental punishment  could  remove  out  of  the  way,  I  were 
in  no  strait  nor  dilemma ;  for  in  that  case,  after  we  have 
suffered  a  while  God  may  remain  satisfied.  But  what  ^ 
base  notion  of  God  this  is  ;  as  if  there  were  any  propor- 
tion between  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  so  much  pain  and  punish- 
ment, in  the  mind  of  the  Most  Holy!  That  notion  of 
the    Universalists  would    dethrone    my  God  at   once   from 

all  my  reverence,  and  set  Him  lower  than   myself;    foras- 
VOL.  V.  B 


1 8  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

much  as  I  would  despise  myself  for  wreaking  out  so  much 
punishment  upon  him  who  had  offended  me,  and,  without 
more  ado,  taking  him  by  the  hand  as  if  he  were  cleansed. 
Not  but  that  pain  and  penalty  will  and  must  ever  attend 
on  sin,  but  that  an  age  and  an  age  of  ages  of  pain  and 
punishment  will  never,  never  wipe  away  sin.  Sin  is  an 
alienation  of  the  will ;  it  is  a  spiritual  act  against  a  Spirit, 
against  the  good  and  gracious  Father  of  spirits  ;  and  the 
root  of  its  punishment  is  in  the  will ;  the  strength  of  its  bond- 
age, the  yoke  of  its  thraldom,  is  upon  the  will ;  and  it  is  only 
the  recovery  and  restoration  of  the  will,  in  its  own  act,  which 
can  put  us  again  even  on  good  terms  with  ourselves,  much 
more  with  the  gracious  God  whom  we  had  offended.  But 
what  is  to  bring  back  the  will  of  a  spirit  which  of  its  own 
accord  hath  swerved  away,  which  did  not  choose  to  stand 
when  all  was  in  its  favour  .-'  what,  I  say,  is  to  bring  it  back 
again  when  its  whole  bent  is  gone  the  other  way,  with  all  the 
malicious  powers  of  darkness  overloading  and  overbearing  it  ^ 
Tell  me  how  this  is  to  come  to  pass,  and  you  shall  be  my 
prophet  and  priest  and  king.  For  verily  to  do  this  pertaineth 
only  to  Him  who  is  my  Prophet,  and  Priest,  and  King. 

Conceiving  thus  of  sin  as  an  eternal  and  unchangeable,  an 
original  condition  of  the  will,  which  no  punishment  can  alter, 
which  all  the  accidents  within  the  coasts  of  time  cannot  alter, 
I  stand  at  that  pass  over  which  nothing  can  carry  me  but 
Almighty  power ;  and  I  may  say,  with  reverence,  that  not 
even  power  Almighty  of  itself  can  deliver  me.  Almighty 
power  cannot  reconcile  this  contradiction,  that  holiness  should 
be  preserved,  and  the  creatures  who  have  offended  holiness 
be,  by  a  bare  act  of  will,  reinstated.  We  stand  here  upon 
the  brink  of  a  chasm,  over  which,  with  reverence  be  it  spoken, 
even  Almighty  power  cannot  convey  us  without  some  further 
revelation  than  that  of  His  omnipotence.  The  unity  of  the 
Godhead  availeth  us  not  here,  where  our  reason  refuseth  to 
move  forward  without  the  revelation  of  more  persons  than 
one  in  the  Godhead  ;  from  which  the  revelation  of  the  mys- 
tery Cometh. 

Therefore  the  divine  evangelist  beginneth  by  declaring  the 
eternal  Divinity  of  the  Word,  saying,  "  In  the  beginning  was 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         19 

the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word 
was  God  ;"  and,  after  dilating  upon  His  uncreated  essence, 
upon  His  divine  works  in  the  times  of  old,  when  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  were  created  by  Him,  and  hfe  and  light  were 
bestowed  by  Him  and  of  Him,  he  addeth,  "  And  the  Word 
was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  full  of  grace  and  truth. 
And  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace. 
For  the  law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came 
by  Jesus  Christ.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the 
only-begotten  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he 
hath  revealed  him."  John  comprehended  the  mystery  at 
which  I  declared,  a  little  ago,  that  human  reason  must  stand 
for  ever  nonplussed,  and  which  no  knowledge  of  God's  unity 
can  ever  resolve.  Therefore,  after  declaring  the  eternal  God- 
head of  the  Word,  and  at  the  same  time  intimating  the  mys- 
tery of  His  personal  distinctness,  by  saying,  not  merely  that 
He  was  God,  but  also  that  He  was  with  God,  he  proceeds  to 
declare  His  incarnation, — "He  became  flesh;"  and  the  end  of 
it, — for  the  purpose  of  revealing  to  us  that  grace  of  God  to 
the  sinful,  and  truth  to  those  with  whom  He  had  entered  into 
covenant,  which  could  never  have  been  known  if  we  had  not 
fallen,  and  would  never  have  been  known  had  the  Son  not 
been  willing  and  free  to  take  upon  Himself  the  remedy  of  our 
condition.  Oh,  what  volumes  are  contained  in  these  words, 
"  Grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ !"  Grace ;  that  is, 
the  knowledge  of  the  love  and  mercy  which  is  in  God,  of  the 
whole  mystery  of  good-will  and  peace  which  is  in  the  gospel ; 
the  condescension  of  the  holiest  to  the  most  unholy.  His  holi- 
ness unsullied  by  the  condescension,  yea,  made  infinitely  more 
bright ;  the  condescension  of  the  Almighty  to  the  weakest ; 
all  that  is  included  in  the  word  Father,  Redeemer,  Saviour  ;  a 
mystery  into  which  the  angels  desire  to  look,  and  which  the 
apostle  who  had  profited  the  largest  therein,  could  only  ad- 
mire with  silent  admiration,  saying,  "  Oh,  the  height  and  the 
depth  and  the  length  and  the  breadth  of  the  love  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus;  it  passeth  knowledge."  Truth;  that  is,  the  ful- 
filment of  all  promise,  the  keeping  of  all  covenant,  the  answer 
of  all  expectation,  which  had  been  given  since  the  world  began, 
and  the  assurance  of  all  faith,  which  might  be  rested  thereon 


20  THE  INCARNATION: 

until  the  world  should  end.  This  grace  and  truth  came,  not 
by  the  w<?r^,  but  by  the  Word  Incarnate,  by  Jesus  Christ ;  that 
is,  Jah  the  Saviour  and  Anointed  One.  For  it  was  in  the  act  of 
becoming  flesh  that  all  grace  and  all  truth  was  embodied. 
His  name,  Jesus  Christ,  importeth  it.  His  name,  the  Word, 
importeth  only  his  Divine  essence  and  separate  personality 
from  all  eternity. 

Now,  brethren,  from  this  separate  personality  of  the  Word 
is  derived  the  resolution  of  the  great  mystery,  "  how  God  can 
be  just  and  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly  ;"  and  from  this  point 
we  must  begin  to  speak  in  the  language  of  the  Trinity  ;  for  no 
one  can  speak  of  the  redemption  but  in  that  language,  as  may 
be  seen  in  the  eighteenth  verse,  which,  after  having  spoken  of 
the  grace  and  truth  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Evangelist 
thus  begins,  "  No  one  hath  seen  God  at  any  time;"  but  he 
cannot  conclude  it  in  the  language  of  Unity,  and  is  forced  to 
add,  "  the  only-begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  he  hath  revealed  him."  The  Father's  holiness  of  will 
remaineth  unaltered  ;  He  remaineth  the  unchangeable  enemy 
and  implacable  destroyer  of  sin.  His  holiness  continueth,  like 
a  fire,  to  consume  the  transgressor  now  as  when .  sin  first  en- 
tered into  the  world.  But  man's  transgression  did  not  reach 
to,  or  in  any  way  affect,  the  relation  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  between  whom  no  creature  intermeddleth,  or  can  in 
any  wise  intermeddle.  This  is  secret,  deep,  and  unsearch- 
able ;  and  the  joys  of  it  are  not  to  be  apprehended  by  created 
minds,  nor  discoursed  of  by  human  tongues  ;  therefore  was  it 
possible,  within  the  depths  of  the  Divine  nature,  for  the  Father 
to  forego  the  delight  which  He  had  with  His  Son  in  His  own 
bosom,  and  to  permit  Him  to  come  forth  on  the  ministry  of 
redemption,  in  order  that,  after  suffering  for  a  while.  He  might 
return  again  with  the  honour  of  redemption  added  to  the 
honour  of  creation  and  providence.  In  this,  I  say,  there  is  no 
impeachment  of  the  holiness  of  God,  while  there  is  a  great 
manifestation  of  His  love,  in  not  sparing  His  only-begotten 
Son,  but  giving  Him  up  to  the  death  for  us  all.  Nay,  but 
there  is  a  great  manifestation  and  illustration  of  His  holiness 
likewise,  if,  when  His  dear  Son,  His  beloved  before  all  ages, 
took  upon  Himself  our  nature,  His  holiness  should  pursue 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         21 

Him  as  man,  as  flesh,  with  what  awful  severity  it  pursueth 
sinful  flesh  ;  if,  when  He  was  found  within  the  accursed 
realm  and  blighted  barren  region  of  sin,  the  most  direful 
scourges  thereof  should  seize  Him,  and  smite  Him,  and 
cleave  to  Him  even  as  unto  others ;  if,  against  Him,  the  law 
should  stand  up  in  all  its  offended  majesty,  and  measure 
Him  without  abatement  at  every  point ;  and  if  Satan  also 
and  the  powers  of  darkness,  and  if  death  also  and  the  grave, 
and  if  hell  also  and  its  legions  should  combine  against  Him, 
even  as  against  any  other  of  the  children.  Which  being  truly 
fulfilled  in  the  manifestation,  the  holiness  of  God  was,  in  a 
most  marvellous  way,  illustrated  in  the  midst  of  His  love; 
yea,  and  over  His  love.  Yes,  I  will  say  over  His  love ;  for 
holiness  is  the  column  of  the  Divine  majesty  and  power,  the 
root  and  trunk  of  that  tree,  of  which  goodness  and  wisdom, 
mercy  and  love,  are  the  various  branches,  flowers,  and  fruits. 
Which  holiness,  I  say,  is  more  illustrated  and  honoured  in 
the  incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ  than  it  would  have  been  in 
the  destruction  of  a  thousand  worlds,  fallen,  forsaken,  and 
abandoned  because  of  sin.  So  that,  on  the  part  of  the 
Father,  unchangeableness  is  preserved,  hatred  of  sin  is  pre- 
served, the  stability  of  righteousness  is  preserved,  while  love, 
and  grace,  and  mercy  find  their  proper  manifestation  toward 
sinful  men. 

Let  us  now  turn  and  consider  how  this  great  act  affects  the 
condition  of  the  Son ;  for  ignorant  men  take  upon  them  to 
scoff  at  this  great  work  of  the  Incarnation,  as  if  it  were  a  sub- 
stitution of  the  innocent  instead  of  the  guilty,  against  all 
reason  and  justice,  and  to  the  subversion  of  all  reason  and 
justice  in  the  breasts  of  men.  Thus  they  speak  in  ignorance, 
not  understanding  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm. 
But  first,  I  pray  you  to  observe,  that  there  was  no  necessity, 
to  speak  after  the  manner  of  men,  obliging  God  to  find  an 
atonement  for  sin  ; — which  is  manifest  from  the  condition  of 
the  angels  who  kept  not  their  first  estate,  and  are  reserved 
in  chains  of  darkness  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day. 
Their  case  was  passed  by,  while  ours  was  chosen  for  the 
manifestation  of  grace  and  truth :  which  is,  therefore,  devoutly 
to  be  contemplated  as  an  act  of  sovereignty  in  the  midst  of 


2  2  THE  INCARNATION: 

mercy ;  for  there  must  be  sovereignty  in  all  God's  acts,  else 
He  were  no  longer  gracious ;  and  it  is  to  be  ascribed  to  no 
other  cause  than  His  own  electing  love,  which  is  an  ultimate 
fact  and  principle  that  cannot  be  passed  beyond.  It  needed 
to  be  shewn  that  God  could  punish  sin  unchangeably  ;  or,  in 
other  words,  that  the  proper  nature  of  sin  is  to  propagate 
and  increase  itself  for  ever.  There  must  be  a  monument  of 
all  the  Divine  attributes,  and  this  of  the  fallen  angels  is  the 
monument  of  His  unextinguishable  hatred  of  sin.  The 
earth  shall  be  redeemed,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  shall 
be  made  perfect,  who  shall  thenceforward  be  the  monu- 
ment to  all  the  universe  of  grace.  And  where  is  the  monu- 
ment of  God's  justice  and  severity  against  sin  for  the  univer- 
sal host  to  contemplate .-'  Hell  with  her  prince  of  darkness, 
her  rebel  angels,  and  all  reprobate  men,  shall  be  that  monu- 
ment for  ever  and  ever.  "  They  shall  go  forth  and  look  upon 
the  carcases  of  the  men  who  have  transgressed  against  me ; 
for  their  worm  dieth  not,  neither  shall  their  fire  be  quenched." 
It  is  thus  that  every  attribute  of  God  shall  have  its  proper 
manifestation,  or  be  realised  in  some  object  which  His  crea- 
tures may  behold  and  admire. 

Bearing  this  in  mind,  that  the  great  object  of  the  incar- 
nation, whereof  we  discourse,  is  to  bring  into  visible  manifes- 
tation and  real  being  the  monument  of  God's  grace  and  mercy, 
and  that  the  Father  worketh  nothing  but  by  the  Son,  it  is  clear 
that  it  properly  became  Him,  who  created  angels  and  men, 
and  all  things,  and  thereby  gave  the  demonstration  of  God's 
creative  attributes  of  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  &c., — Him, 
who  is  at  last  to  judge  all  things;  and  by  constituting  hell,  to 
give  the  demonstration  of  God's  attributes  of  justice  and  holi- 
ness, abhorrence  of  sin,  &c. ;  that  same  One  it  did  become  to 
give  the  intermediate  demonstration  of  God's  mercy,  and 
grace,  and  forgiveness  in  recovering,  redeeming,  and  regener- 
ating the  earth,  and  in  constituting  its  blessedness  for  ever. 
And  besides  these  three  great  demonstrations  of  the  Godhead, 
creation,  redemption,  and  judgment,  no  others  are  known  unto 
me. 

Now,  with  respect  to  the  part  which  the  Son  bore  in  this 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         23 

great  covenant,  made  and  scaled  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  I  pray  you  to  remember  what  I  observed  above,  that 
the  essence  of  sin  is  spiritual,  in  the  will ;  and  that  the  inward 
darkness  and  trouble,  the  outward  suffering  and  sorrow,  are 
only  the  consequences,  and  I  may  say  the  accidents,  which 
cleave  unto  a  will  or  spirit  which  hath  cast  off  the  authority  of 
God,  and  become  a  law  unto  itself :  therefore  the  work  which 
the  Son  had  to  perform  was  to  redeem  the  will  of  man  from 
its  bondage  to  sin  and  Satan  ;  or  rather,  I  should  say,  from  the 
curse  of  God,  declared  in  paradise  against  transgression. 
Which  deliverance  to  accomplish,  he  must  come  into  the  very 
condition  of  that  which  he  would  redeem  ;  become  flesh,  and 
take  up  into  Himself  the  very  conditions  of  a  human  will,  or 
human  spirit ;  that  is,  become  very  man,  and  Himself  wrestle 
therein  against  flesh  and  blood — against  principalities — against 
powers — against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world — 
against  spiritual  wickednesses  in  high  places.  If  it  pleased  Him 
to  undertake  this,  no  one  will  say  that  He  was  hindered  from 
undertaking  it.  If  He  had  love  strong  enough  to  make  the 
.sacrifice,  there  was  no  unrighteousness,  there  was  no  dishonour 
— unless  mercy,  and  love,  and  grace  be  a  dishonour.  For  the 
suffering  which  it  caused  Him — first,  the  hiding  of  the  light 
of  the  Divinity  ;  secondly,  the  being  subject  unto  a  law,  being 
Himself  both  the  Lawgiver  and  the  Law  ;  thirdly,  the  encoun- 
tering His  own  creatures,  and  being  under  their  continual 
malice  and  persecution  ;  fourthly,  the  presence  and  very  close 
communion  in  which  He  dwelt  with  all  manner  of  sin,  touch- 
ing, tasting,  hearing,  seeing,  feeling  it,  and  being  in  all  points 
tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin  ;  lastly,  the  under- 
going of  death  and  burial  ; — these  things,  which  I  cannot  now 
handle  particularly,  are  but  the  outward  accidents  and  ap- 
parent attendants  of  that  humiliation  into  human  nature  which 
He  underwent.  The  merit  of  the  act  lay  not  in  these  outward 
visible  things,  nor  is  by  them  to  be  appreciated  :  even  as  the 
heinousness  of  sin  is  not  thus  to  be  measured,  but  standeth  in 
the  reprobate  will ;  so  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  to  be  ap- 
preciated by  the  willingness  with  which  He  undertook  hu- 
manity, and   underwent  the  fiery  proof;  and   if  you  would 


24  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

have  apparent  proofs  of  that  wilHngness,  they  are  to  be  found 
in  the  meekness,  gentleness,  patience,  long-suffering,  and  for- 
giveness with  which  He  endured  it. 

And  that  this  is  the  highest  view  of  the  Lord's  work,  the 
reasoning  of  St  Paul  upon  the  .40th  Psalm  doth  verify.  Verse 
6  :  "  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  desire ;  mine  ears 
hast  thou  opened  :  burnt-offering  and  sin-offering  hast  thou 
not  required."  He  rejects  the  Jewish,  or  rather  the  cere- 
monial form  of  the  work,  even  as  I  have  endeavoured  to 
raise  your  views  above  it,  to  the  higher  view  of  it  which  is 
contained  in  the  following  verses :  Verses  7,  8  :  "  Then  said 
I,  Lo,  I  come  :  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me  ; 
I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God :  yea,  thy  law  is  within 
my  heart ;" — in  which  the  true  end  of  His  advent  or  incarna- 
tion is  declared  to  be  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  to  have  His 
law  written  on  His  heart ;  or  to  give  the  example  of  a  man 
who,  as  man,  should  overcome  all  the  enemies  of  man,  and 
reobtain  the  possession  of  that  dominion  of  man  which  had 
been  lost  in  the  fall.  Now  let  us  observe  St  Paul's  reasoning 
upon  this  text.  Heb.  x.  8,  9 :  "  Above,  when  he  said,  Sacrifice 
and  offerings,  and  burnt-offerings,  and  offering  for  sin  thou 
wouldest  not,  neither  hadst  pleasure  therein  ;  which  are  offered 
by  the  law;  then  said  he,  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God.  He 
taketh  away  the  first,  that  he  may  establish  the  second."  It  is 
in  the  active  obedience  of  Christ,  in  the  perfect  submission  and 
obedience  which  He  yielded,  in  the  doing  without  any  failure 
all  the  will  of  God,  that  He  became  the  Author  of  salvation 
to  all  them  that  believe.  The  suffering  which  He  came 
under  was,  as  it  were,  but  the  putting  of  that  will  to  proof; 
and  the  well-pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God  was  the  enduring 
of  the  fiery  proof,  and  the  continual  declaration  of,  "  Yet  not 
my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  Hence  it  is,  that,  in  the  Gospel 
of  John,  the  Lord's  whole  discourse  is  but  as  it  were  one  ac- 
knowledgment of  His  Father's  will,  and  obedience  to  His 
Father's  commandment  ;  or,  as  it  is  written  in  that  same 
psalm,  (verses  9,  10,) — "  I  have  preached  righteousness  in  the 
great  congregation  :  lo,  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  O  Lord, 
thou  knowest.  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my 
heart ;  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation  :  I 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.        25 

have  not  concealed  thy  loving-kindness  and  thy  truth  from 
the  great  congregation."  And,  brethren,  it  is  by  the  will  of 
God  that  we  are  sanctified  still,  as  St  Paul  reasoneth,  and  as 
St  John  confirmeth  :  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not.  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them 
gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that 
believe  on  his  name  :  which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God,"  (John 
i.  11-13.) 

I  consider  it,  therefore,  to  be  rather  a  low  view  of  the  Re- 
deemer's work,  to  contemplate  it  so  much  in  the  sense  of 
acute  bodily  sufifering,  or  to  enlarge  upon  it  under  the  idea  of 
a  price  or  a  bargain,  which  is  a  carnal  similitude,  suitable  and 
proper  to  the  former  carnal  dispensation,  and  which  should, 
as  much  as  possible,  be  taken  away  for  the  more  spiritual 
idea  of  our  sanctification  by  the  full  and  perfect  obedience 
which  Christ  rendered  unto  the  will  of  God  ;  thereby  pur- 
chasing back,  and  procuring  for  as  many  as  believe  in  Him, 
their  justification  and  sanctification  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
which  is  their  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  and  reliance 
on  His  eternal  purpose.  For  whosoever  is  brought  into 
conformity  with  the  will  of  God  is  thereby  included  in  His 
purpose.  It  was  a  great  act  of  power  in  the  Son — a  demon- 
stration of  His  almighty  power,  to  take  up  flesh  and  strengthen 
it  against  all  the  powers  of  hell — to  take  up  flesh  and  purify 
it  against  all  the  powers  of  sin  and  corruption.  But  no  one 
will  say  it  was  impossible,  for  it  hath  been  accomplished ;  and 
no  one  will  say  that  there  was  any  violation  of  the  principles 
of  eternal  holiness  and  justice,  for  the  Son  to  do  what  was 
within  His  power,  or  for  the  Father  to  suffer  Him  to  do  it. 
With  respect  to  the  communication  of  the  gift  to  others,  we 
do  not  now  entreat :  at  present  we  are  considering  only  of  the 
purchase  of  the  gift ;  and  this,  as  hath  been  said,  was  by  His 
obedience  and  perfect  fulfilment  of  God's  most  holy  law, 
which  had  been  ofl"ended  by  our  first  parents  and  by  all  their 
posterity.  And  it  was  the  ofl'ended  law,  or,  in  other  words, 
God's  unalterable,  immitigable  holiness,  which  perpetuated 
the  punishment.  If  any  one  of  Adam's  children  could  have 
stood  up  and  kept  the  law,  he  would,  in  virtue  of  his  own 


2  6  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

innocency,  have  lived  in  it,  and  known  neither  suffering  nor 
death.  The  man,  Christ  Jesus,  did  this,  and,  in  virtue  of  His 
work,  now  Hveth,  it  being  impossible  that  He  should  be  holden 
of  death.  By  which  life  of  obedience  the  law  stood  honoured: 
it  was  proved  to  be  holy,  it  was  proved  to  he  just,  it  was 
proved  to  he  good,  and  it  was  satisfied.  I  may  say  the  holi- 
ness of  God's  law  was  never  manifested  upon  the  earth  till 
now,  because  it  was  never  kept.  In  the  idea  it  was  holy;  but 
never  in  the  reality,  till  Christ  said,  "  Father,  I  have  glorified 
thee  on  the  earth  ;  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou 
gavest  me  to  do."  The  justiee  of  the  law  might  well  be 
doubted,  and  its  cruelty  believed,  at  least  its  disproportion  to 
human  conditions :  forasmuch  as  every  man  had  smarted  and 
suffered  under  it,  and  no  one  been  able  to  attain  unto  the 
keeping  of  it.  It  might  have  been  supposed  the  law  of  a 
tyrannical,  or  arbitrary,  or  even  a  malicious  being,  inasmuch 
as  it  had  punished  all  and  acquitted  none.  This  was  a  great, 
a  very  great  apparent  stigma,  which  the  perfect  obedience  of 
Christ  in  human  flesh  removed,  proving  unequivocally  that  it 
was  made  for  flesh,  and  would  have  blessed  humanity  had  its 
gracious  intention  and  adaptation  not  been  crossed  and  pre- 
vented by  the  fall  of  our  first  parents,  and  the  consequent 
apostasy  of  the  will  of  man,  and  its  alienation  from  every 
thing  which  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good ;  for  the  goodness  of 
the  law, — that  is,  its  kindness  and  bountifulness,  and  fruits  of 
blessedness, — were  all  contradicted  by  the  fact  of  such  long 
and  universal  misery  as  had  been  upon  the  earth.  The 
Divine  purpose  in  creating  human  nature,  and  putting  it 
under  His  holy,  just,  and  good  law,  seemed  to  be  wholly  frus- 
trated ;  the  very  end  of  creation  seemed  defeated ;  there  was 
no  glory  of  God  redounding  from  it,  but  glory  to  the  enemy 
of  God.  The  world  had  gone  into  chaos,  and  the  great 
achievement  was,  out  of  the  chaos  to  bring  something  more 
perfect  than  before.  To  justify  the  ancient  constitution  of  law 
and  government  under  which  the  world  was  established  at 
first ;  to  retrieve,  to  do  more  than  retrieve,  the  honour  of  the 
Creator, — to  make  it  glorious.  This  was  the  first  end  for  which 
Christ  gave  Himself  to  become  man  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world.     To  this  agreeth  the  reasoning  of  the  apostle  Paul 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         27 

in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans — "  Do  we  then  make  void  the 
law  through  faith  ?  God  forbid :  yea,  we  establish  the  law," 
(chap.  iii.  31.)  "That  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might  be 
fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the 
Spirit,"  (chap.  viii.  4.)  "  For  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness  to  everyone  that  believeth,"  (chap.  x.  4.)  "For 
as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse : 
for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in 
all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them,"  (Gal.  iii.  10.)  "  But  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was 
come,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under 
the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we 
might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons,"  (chap.  iv.  4,  5.) 

Thus  far,  then,  it  is  manifest,  that  when  the  Son  of  God  said 
unto  the  Father  from  all  eternity,  "Lo,  I  come;  in  the  volume 
of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me  :  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O 
my  God,  yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart,"  His  object  was,  as 
is  immediately  added,  to  preach  God's  righteousness  in  the 
great  congregation,  to  declare  His  faithfulness  and  salvation  ; 
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  holiness  of  God  was  illus- 
trated by  the  Son  of  man,  before  the  great  congregation,  as  it 
never  had  been  before ;  that  the  ends  of  creation  were  won- 
drously  manifested,  and  the  darkness,  and  gross  darkness, 
began  to  be  cleared  away.  This  is  done,  however,  as  yet  only 
to  the  great  congregation, — that  is,  to  the  elect  Church ;  the 
rest  of  the  world  remaining  as  dark  almost  as  before.  But  in 
the  fulness  of  the  time,  the  manifestation  shall  be  enlarged  to 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and,  in  the  end,  unto  all  the 
creatures  of  God  who  are  now  looking  upon  the  progress  of 
its  accomplishment.  Thus  much  for  the  justification  of  God's 
holiness,  for  which  the  incarnation  of  His  Son  was  the  ap- 
pointed way.  But  much  yet  remaineth  to  be  said  with  respect 
to  the  demonstration  of  His  grace  in  the  forgiveness  and  sal- 
vation of  the  sinner. 

PART  II. 

Besides  this  origin  or  principle  of  the  incarnation,  the  jus- 
tification of  His  holiness  and  goodness  in  the  creation  of  man, 


28  THE  INCARNATION: 

which  Satan  had  succeeded  in  obscuring,  there  is  another : 
the  declaration  of  God's  grace  and  mercy  in  the  salvation  of 
sinners,  whereby  He  could  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  the 
ungodly.  Not  only  had  Satan's  work  to  be  undone,  but 
out  of  it  the  defeat  of  Satan  was  to  be  brought,  and  the 
final  extirpation  of  his  power  of  evil.  He  had  withstood 
God's  work  in  the  creation  of  man,  and  for  so  doing  the 
Lord  purposed  to  undo  him.  To  make  this  more  complete 
also,  it  is  to  be  done  by  means  of  man  ;  and  to  this  end 
Christ  became  man,  and  submitted  Himself  to  the  very 
condition  of  a  sinner.  He  became  sin  for  us  who  knew  no 
sin.  I  say,  Christ  came  into  .the  condition  of  a  sinner ;  and 
that,  too,  I  may  say,  of  the  chief  of  sinners  ;  not  having 
where,  to  hide  His  head  while  He  lived,  and  in  His  most 
ignominious  death  of  the  cross  deemed  less  honourable  than 
a  murderer,  a  thief,  and  a  seditious  person.  This  condition 
of  the  chief  of  sinners  He  who  did  no  sin  did  come  into,  in 
order  to  give  sin  and  Satan,  death  and  the  grave,  and  hell, 
all  advantages  against  Him,  and  conquer  them  ;  and  so  to 
prove  to  all  who  should  come  after  Him,  that  they  might  be 
conquered.  Likewise  to  shew  that  human  nature,  by  such  a 
sojourning  in  the  tents  of  sin,  was  not  excluded  for  ever  from 
the  tents  and  habitations  of  holiness,  but  might  yet  inherit 
the  love  and  honour  of  God,  as  did  the  First-born  when  He 
rose  from  the  dead ;  to  shew  that  it  was  possible  for  God  to 
be  just,  and  to  justify  the  sinner.  But  now  the  question 
ariseth,  How  could  Christ  who  had  done  no  sin  come  into 
the  condition  of  one  who  had  sinned,  be  made  of  a  woman, 
and  under  the  law  ;  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with 
grief;  He  who  had  done  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in 
His  mouth  }  I  can  find  no  answer  to  this,  but  that  our  sins 
were  imputed  to  Him;  for  if  they  were  not  His  own,  they 
must  be  those  of  others.  And  to  have  punished  one  that 
was  innocent  with  the  consequences  of  sin,  seems  as  much, 
and  more  contrary  to  the  holiness  of  God,  than  freely  to 
pardon  one  who  had  sinned  without  any  atonement,  whereof 
we  have  shewed  the  most  fatal  and  mischievous  fruits.  There 
is  no  accounting  in  any  other  way  for  Christ's  sufferings,  but 
by  saying,  that  they  were  vicarious,  that  is,   undergone  for 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE  WILL  OF  GOD.         29 

others ;  because  He  himself  was  without  sin,  and  should 
have  known  no  sorrow,  nor  suffering,  nor  death.  It  must 
either  be  of  the  nature  of  an  atonement,  or  of  the  nature  of 
injustice.  No  one  can  adopt  the  latter  without  subverting 
all  things ;  and  the  former,  therefore,  of  suffering  for  others, 
the  Just  for  the  unjust,  is  the  only  one  which  remaincth.  As 
it  is  written,  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us :  for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is 
every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree,"  (Gal.  iii.  13.)  And  again, 
"For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,"  (i  Pet.  iii.  18.) 
And  again,  "  But  now  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the 
law  is  manifested,  being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  pro- 
phets ;  even  the  righteousness  of  God,  which  is  by  faith  of 
Jesus  Christ,  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe :  for 
there  is  no  difference  :  for  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of 
the  glory  of  God  ;  being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through 
the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  whom  God  hath  set 
forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare 
his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past,  through 
the  forbearance  of  God  ;  to  declare,  I  say,  at  this  time,  his 
righteousness  ;  that  he  might  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him 
which  believeth  in  Jesus.  Where  is  boasting,  then  .-'  It  is 
excluded.  By  what  law  .-*  of  works  .''  Nay  ;  but  by  the  law 
of  faith,"  (Rom.  iii.  21-27.) 

There  can  be  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  this  substitution  of 
the  innocent  Lamb  of  God  for  the  guilty  children  of  man,  is 
a  second  great  purpose  of  the  incarnation,  wherein  alone  con- 
sisteth  the  manifestation  of  the  grace.  The  former  is  the 
manifestation  of  God's  truth  in  the  creation  of  man,  which 
Satan  had  sought  to  turn,  and  had  succeeded  in  turning,  into 
one  universal  he.  But  this  is  the  manifestation  of  the  mercy 
or  grace,  in  forgiving  the  believer  in  Jesus,  notwithstanding 
his  great  sinfulness. 

The  question  of  the  atonement,  or  substitution  of  our  sins, 
to  which  we  are  now  arrived,  in  considering  the  great  sub- 
ject of  the  origin  of  the  incarnation,  doth  not  so  much 
grow  out  of,  as  it  is  involved  in,  and  throughout  implicated 
with,  being  of  the  very  essence  of,  the  incarnation  ;  not  a  cir- 
cumstance of  its  manifestation,  but  an  original  and  substantial 


30  THE  INCA  RNA  TION : 

element  in  the  idea  itself.  For  if,  as  we  have  shewed  at  large, 
the  original  cause  and  ultimate  end  of  the  incarnation  be,  in 
order  to  make  known  another  and  a  tenderer  aspect  of  the 
Godhead,  which  is  His  grace  in  the  forgiveness  and  recovery  of 
the  fallen  ;  and  if  this  discovery  of  God's  hidden  being  could 
not,  unto  His  intelligent  creatures,  be  revealed,  but  where  sin 
had  entered  and  offences  had  abounded  ;  it  is  very  evident 
that  the  question.  How  that  sin  is  to  be  forgiven  ?  comes  into 
the  very  essence  of  the  question,  and  stands  in  the  direct  way 
of  the  incarnation,  which  cannot  come  into  the  purpose  of 
God  until  the  other  be  first  revealed  to  His  holiness.  •  And 
though  it  doth  open  the  sealed  door  of  that  labyrinth,  to  have 
more  than  one  person  in  the  Divine  substance  revealed  unto 
us  ;  yet,  as  there  is  but  one  mind  or  will  between  these  per- 
sons, the  question  still  remains.  How,  without  any  change  in 
that  Holy  Will,  by  whose  unchangeable  holiness  the  fall  doth 
come  and  prepare  the  way  for  the  manifestation  of  grace,  the 
fallen  can  be  forgiven,  and  the  curse  removed,  and  the  tide  of 
sinninsf  stemmed,  and  the  waters  of  Divine  wrath  abated  and 
dried  up  from  the  surface  of  the  ground  ?  It  cannot  be  by  a 
voluntary  change  of  will  ;  which  is  the  only  thing  of  which 
we  can  say.  It  is  impossible  with  God.  For  though  it  be  oft 
said  in  Scripture  that  God  repenteth  and  changeth,  this  ii 
said  to  those  living  under  that  very  dispensation  of  grace,  into 
the  possibilities  of  which  we  are  now  examining.  The  angels 
which  kept  not  their  first  estate  have  no  idea  of  any  such  lan- 
guage. They  believe,  but  hope  not.  They  believe  and  tremble. 
"  Hope  comes  not  to  them  which  comes  to  all."  The  poet 
should  have  said,  which  comes  to  all  who  live  under  the  dis- 
pensation of  grace,  or  to  whom  a  dispensation  of  grace  is 
possible.  I  say  it  is  impossible  for  the  Divine  will  to  change 
once ;  for  if  it  were  once  to  change,  it  might  change  again  and 
again  ;  and  how  often,  or  when,  or  on  what  occasion,  who  could 
know  1  Especially,  and  above  all,  in  the  essential  point  of 
holiness  and  hatred  of  sin,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  law,  order, 
and  blessedness.  His  purposes  will  open,  and  do  open,  and  a 
great  insight  was  opened  into  them  by  the  incarnation  whereof 
we  treat ;  but  the  latter  end  thereof  must  be  as  the  beginning, 
harmony  and  consistency  pervading  the  whole.    And  yet  here 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE  WILL  OF  GOD.         31 

is  the  world  and  the  race  of  men  living  under  the  sense  and 
certain  promise  of  forgiveness,  redemption,  regeneration,  re- 
storation to  God's  image,  a  thorough  and  radical  extirpation 
of  sin,  an  induction  and  eternal  reign  of  righteousness  and 
blessedness.  And  the  marvel  is,  how  this  our  condition  of 
grace,  mercy,  and  hopefulness,  of  faith,  love,  and  assurance, 
was  made  possible  with  a  God  who  had  already  brought  in, 
by  His  offended  holiness,  the  mighty  overthrow ;  and  who, 
though  He  changeth  not,  hath  brought  in,  by  His  grace,  the 
mighty  recovery.  It  is  indeed  a  question  ;  a  question  to  en- 
gage inquiry,  and  wonder,  and  gratitude  for  ever  and  ever. 

As  we  have  seen  it  written  in  the  Scriptures,  that  Christ 
was  without  sin,  and  that  no  guile  was  found  in  His 
mouth,  I  say,  the  question  ariseth  naturally,  "And, where- 
fore then  did  He  suffer;  and  wherefore  then  was  He  offered 
up  to  bear  the  sins  of  His  Church,  and  to  bring  in  an 
everlasting  salvation .?  Is  not  this  to  lay  the  sins  of  the 
guilty  upon  the  head  of  the  innocent.'"'  It  is.  But  ought 
this  to  be  done }  I  answer,  It  ought  not  to  be  done  by  any 
one  creature  to  another  creature ;  neither  hath  it  been  done 
by  God  to  any  creature.  Christ  was  not  a  creature,  but  the 
Creator.  He  was  under  no  responsibility  nor  obligation,  and 
therefore  He  might  undertake  what  it  pleased  Him  to  under- 
take agreeably  to  His  Father's  will.  The  maxim,  that  the 
innocent  should  not  suffer  for  the  guilty,  applies  to  human 
judgments,  and  to  human  creatures;  and  it  applies  also  to 
God's  judgment  of  the  creatures,  and  importeth  that  the 
innocent  should  in  no  case  be  compelled  to  suffer  for  the 
guilty,  but  that  every  one  should  be  treated  exactly  accord- 
ing to  his  deeds,  which  is  precisely  the  principle  that  Christ 
hath  laid  down  for  the  judgment  of  men,  "  that  every  one 
shall  give  an  account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the  flesh,  whether 
they  have  been  good  or  evil."  If  the  incarnation  of  Christ, 
and  His  substitution  in  our  stead,  did  away  with  such  right- 
eous judgment,  then  indeed  it  were  to  be  blamed  ;  but  estab- 
lishing, as  it  doth,  the  honour,  and  the  purity,  and  the  right- 
eousness of  the  Divine  law,  as  we  have  shewed  above,  it  is 
rather  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  foundation-stone  of  the 
temple  of  justice,  than  as  its  destruction.     If,  again,  there 


32  THE  INCARNATION: 

were  any  compulsion  laid  on  Christ,  which  word,  compulsion, 
I  use,  knowing  it  to  be  a  false  and  absurd  idea  to  apply  that 
term  to  any  of  the  actings  of  the  Divine  persons,  whose  sub- 
stance is  one  and  the  same,  I  say,  if  there  were  any  com- 
pulsion, obliging  Christ  to  undergo  the  penalty  of  man's 
redemption,  in  that  case  also  there  would  lie  an  objection. 
But  when  He  announceth  the  preparation  of  His  body  and 
His  advent,  He  thus  willingly  doth  it — "  Sacrifice  and  offering 
thou  wouldest  not,  but  a  body  hast  thou  prepared  for  me. 
In  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices  for  sin  hast  thou  had  no 
pleasure.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God." 
It  was  to  do  God's  will  He  took  the  body  which  was  pre- 
pared for  Him  ;  and  He  further  saith,  "  To  do  thy  will  I  take 
delight ;  thy  law  is  within  my  heart."  And  it  is  added,  "  By 
the  which  will  we  are  sanctified,  through  the  offering  of  the 
body  of  Christ  once."  And  if  Christ  pleased,  if  He  delighted, 
to  do  the  will  of  His  Father,  in  taking  to  Himself  a  human 
body  and  a  reasonable  soul,  who  will  say  there  was  any 
infraction  of  holiness  in  that,  in  which  I  can  see  nothing  but 
the  highest  grace  and  condescension  t  This,  moreover,  was 
not  an  act  of  will,  saying,  Let  the  sinner  be  forgiven ;  but  it 
was  an  act  of  will,  saying,  Let  the  sinner  behold  the  greatness 
of  the  grace  which  resideth  in  the  depths  of  the  Godhead.  If 
any  one  say  that  this  also  is  change  in  God,  that  He  should 
please  to  save  the  sinner  whom  He  hath  already  pleased  to 
condemn,  I  say  to  that  person  he  knoweth  not  what  he  saith. 
It  is  not  change  in  God's  unalterable  holiness,  but  a  very  great 
confirmation  of  it.  It  is  no  more  than  the  opening  of  another 
volume  of  the  book,  which,  while  it  emblazons  all  the  rest  with 
light,  doth  contain  infinite  matter  hitherto  unknown ;  of  which 
the  substance  is  the  Father's  willingness  to  permit,  and  the 
Son's  willingness  to  submit  to,  and  the  Spirit's  willingness  to 
effect,  the  incarnation.  Nor  do  I  exclude  God's  love  to  fallen 
men  ;  of  which,  though  I  make  not  a  principle  or  origin,  yet 
this  much  I  will  say  concerning  it,  that  the  Lord  loveth  not 
nor  desireth  to  punish  any  one,  but  is  rather  sorry  and  grieved 
that  His  creatures  should  fall  under  sin's  sore  penalty.  The 
punishment  which  ensues  is  from  the  nature  of  sin  itself,  not 
from  the  nature  of  God,  from  whom  cometh  down  only  good 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE  WILL  OF  GOD.         33 

and  perfect  gifts.  It  is  our  ignorance  of  God,  therefore, 
which  makes  us  to  suppose  that  His  will  is  to  inflict  pain. 
His  will  is  to  protect  holiness,  and  to  promote  it.  There  is, 
therefore,  no  impossibility,  but  quite  the  contrary,  that  God 
should  desire  and  seek  the  salvation  of  His  creatures.  And 
the  only  question  is,  Doth  the  scheme  which  it  hath  pleased 
the  Godhead  to  adopt  bespeak  any  toleration  of  sin,  or  any 
dealing  with  it  as  if  it  were  a  trivial  offence  .^  Doth  sin 
appear  to  have  changed  its  character  in  His  holy  mind  by 
this  new  manifestation  which  He  hath  given  of  Himself? 
Now  the  very  reverse  is  manifest  from  all  the  premises. 

Furthermore,  and  finally,  upon  that  imagined  offence  which 
is  done  to  our  ideas  of  justice,  by  this  doctrine  of  the  Just 
suffering  for  the  unjust,  I  have  to  observe  that,  though  the 
fall  must  come  first  in  the  nature  of  things  before  the  redemp- 
tion, and,  coming  first  in  the  nature  of  things,  must  also  come 
first  in  the  manifestation ;  we  are  not,  therefore,  to  suppose 
that  that  form  of  God's  being  and  attributes  revealed  in  the 
redemption,  which  is  grace,  is  not  as  necessary,  and  essential, 
and  ancient  a  part  of  Himself,  as  that  other  form  of  severity 
and  justice  which  is  revealed  in  the  fall ;  though  the  latter  be 
anterior,  both  in  the  idea  and  in  the  manifestation.  We  are 
apt  to  transfer  the  succession  of  time  to  the  Divine  mind,  and 
so  to  confound  all  things.  But,  truly  with  the  Lord  all 
things  are  present  from  the  beginning,  and  all  appearances 
are  but  the  unfoldings  of  His  mighty  purpose  for  the  mani- 
festation of  that  which  is  with  Him  from  the  beginning.  And 
this  is  most  necessary,  and  constantly  to  be  kept  in  mind,  in 
order  that  we  may  not  give  to  the  eternal  Jehovah  a  succes- 
sion of  existence.  He  is  all  in  all  times  and  in  every  time,  as 
He  is  all  in  all  places  and  in  every  place.  And  this  is  the 
reason  why  every  substantial  matter  of  our  faith  is  by  the 
apostles  traced  up  to  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  : 
and  every  mystery  is  said  to  be  hid  in  Him  before  the  world 
was.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  to  the  question,  Whether  the 
scheme  of  vicarious  suffering  and  imputed  righteousness 
which  we  have  unfolded,  containeth  in  itself  anything  ad- 
verse to  justice .-"  we  at  once  answer,  No,  but  everything 
prosperous  to  righteousness  and  truth.  It  is  from  eternity  of 
VOL.  V.  c 


34  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

the  righteous  and  holy  will  of  God  to  punish  sin  ;  and  it  is  so 
still,  and  whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  hath  a  lively  and  most 
present  sense  of  the  heinousness  of  sin,  and  the  eternal  wrath 
which  abideth  on  it.  It  is  equally  of  the  righteous  and  holy 
will  of  God  to  save  the  sinner,  and  to  shew  forth  His  good- 
ness and  mercy  and  forbearance  in  his  salvation  ;  and  every 
believer  in  Christ  hath  a  most  blessed  hope  and  assurance 
through  grace  of  eternal  salvation.  These  two  forms  of  the 
holy  will  of  God  being  most  consistent  with  one  another, 
will  mutually  illustrate  each  other  when  they  are  manifested. 
And  accordingly  we  find  it  to  be  so.  For  the  Word  which 
revealeth  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  in  whom  the  Father  doth 
objectively  behold  all  His  purposes,  and  is  well  pleased  with 
them,  doth  embody  in  the  one  act  of  His  eternal  sacrifice  the 
utmost  perfection  of  the  Father's  holiness  and  of  the  Father's 
goodness  ;  of  the  former,  in  proving  that  the  law  was  holy, 
and  not  tyrannical ;  a  right,  good,  and  blessed  constitution, 
for  humanity  in  its  fallen  state ;  and  so  reflecting  from  the 
mirror  of  its  purity  the  greatness  and  heinousness  of  our  de- 
pravity. His  holy  life  set  against  our  wicked  life,  is  the  only 
adequate  manifestation  of  our  sin,  or  of  the  righteousness  of 
God.  I  say  not  but  that  in  the  conscience  there  is  a  certain 
sense  of  right,  as  in  the  understanding  there  is  a  certain  dis- 
cernment of  truth ;  but  as  the  latter  could  not  discover  the 
light,  so  could  not  the  former  quicken  the  life,  could  not  give 
it  real  form,  or  even  ideal  form,  until  the  Lord  manifested  it 
in  actual  being.  But  in  thus  manifesting  the  holiness,  He  also 
manifested  the  love,  and  that  in  the  most  exalted  and  mar- 
vellous kind,  as  every  one  doth  freely  acknowledge  ;  for  it 
can  be  brought  into  comparison  with,  and  tried  by,  the  tests 
of  human  love.  "  For  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one 
die  ;  yet  peradventure  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare 
to  die.  But  God  commendeth  his  love  towards  us,  in  that, 
while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us,"  (Rom.  v.  7,  8.) 
But  our  Lord  stateth  it  with  a  modest  tenderness,  "  Greater 
love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his 
friends.  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command 
you,"  (John  xv.  13,  14  ;)  and,  to  say  it  all  in  one  word,  in  the 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE  WILL   OF  GOD.         35 

incarnation  of  Christ  mercy  and  truth  are  met  together,  righte- 
ousness and  peace  have  kissed  each  other. 

These  are  the  best  efforts  which  my  poor  reason  can  make, 
to  open  the  way  of  doubting  minds  to  the  comfort  of  this 
mystery  ;  but  I  would  do  little  justice  to  my  own  convictions, 
and  shew  little  love  to  their  souls,  if  I  were  to  stop  here, 
instead  of  betaking  myself  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony, 
to  see  if  they  speak  according  to  this  way.  In  the  exposition 
of  all  ideas  and  the  resolution  of  all  questions  of  Divine 
theology,  I  hold  it  to  be  not  only  profitable,  but  absolutely 
necessary,  and  indispensably  due  unto  God's  wise  revelation, 
devoutly  to  search  His  word,  in  order  to  discover  whether 
that  idea  or  solution  be  contained  and  much  insisted  upon 
therein  ;  otherwise  we  might  be  spending  precious  time  and 
talents  upon  some  of  those  vain  and  profitless  questions  and 
endless  disputations  which  profit  nothing  to  the  edifying  of 
the  soul :  and  after  having  thus  ascertained  that  it  is  a  great 
head,  and,  as  it  were,  a  commonplace  in  the  word  of  God, 
and  a  frequent  doctrine  and  lesson  of  the  Spirit,  we  shall 
come  in  the  exercise  of  humility,  and  of  that  spiritual  under- 
standing which  is  given  to  the  humble,  by  degrees  to  unravel 
the  difficulties  and  perplexities  which  at  first  present  them- 
selves to  our  natural  reason,  which,  because  it  is  fallen  and 
under  the  thraldom  of  nature,  must  both  have  the  truth  pre- 
sented to  it  from  God,  and  by  His  Spirit  be  cleansed  and 
purified  to  discern  it.  This  method  I  have  ever  followed  for 
myself,  and  shall  now  follow  for  your  greater  edification  in 
this  doctrine  of  the  atonement  for  sin  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
which  I  regard  as  the  second  great  principle  of  the  incarna- 
tion, and  essential  to  that  manifestation  of  the  grace  of  God, 
which  we  have  laid  down  as  its  first  and  original  intention. 

And  here  let  us  begin  with  a  text  which  containeth  the 
truth  in  questions  stated  in  the  bluntest,  baldest  way  possible, 
I  Pet.  iii.  18  :  "  For  Christ  also  hath  suffered  for  our  sins,  the 
Just  for  the  unjust."  Here  Christ  is  declared  to  have  been 
"  just ,"  and  this  not  in  the  looser  sense  of  that  word,  accord- 
ing to  which  we  say  in  ordinary  speech,  a  just,  or  honest,  or 
upright  man,  but  in  the  stricter  sense,  according  to  which  all 


o 


6  THE  INCARNATION: 


men  are  unjust.  For  it  is  said,  "  Christ  hath  also  suffered  for 
our  sins ;"  that  is,  for  the  sins  of  the  Church,  the  sins  of  all 
who  will  believe  in  His  name.  Now,  in  common  language, 
these  are  the  most  upright,  the  most  charitable,  the  most  holy- 
part  of  mankind,  being  under  the  regenerating  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  and  yet  they  are  called  "  the  unjust ;"  which 
clearly  doth  determine  the  word  "  unjust"  to  be  used  in  the 
exact  sense  of  the  sanctuary  as  comprehending  all  men,  and 
declaring  their  universal  and  original  sinfulness  in  the  sight  of 
God.  From  which  characteristic  of  all  men,  an  exception  is 
taken  for  Christ,  who  is  called  by  contradistinction,  "  the  Just." 
And  yet  doth  Peter  declare  that  this  only  just  One  suffered  for 
all  the  unjust  ones  who  believe  in  His  name.  It  is  "  once" 
suffered,  that  is,  during  the  days  of  His  flesh,  when  He  was  "  a 
Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief."  Which  act  of 
suffering  for  our  sins  is  oft  concentred  in  its  great  closing 
scene,  the  cross,  as  we  find  in  the  preceding  chapter  of  this 
very  epistle ;  which,  as  it  casts  light,  and  brings  great  con- 
firmation to  that  which  we  have  now  under  observation,  we 
pray  you  to  peruse  along  with  us,  beginning  at  the  22d  verse, 
and  continuing  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  : — "  Who  did  no  sin, 
neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth  :  who,  when  he  was 
reviled,  reviled  not  again  ;  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened 
not ;  but  committed  himself  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously  : 
who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree, 
that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteousness  ; 
by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed.  For  ye  were  as  sheep  going 
astray ;  but  are  now  returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop 
of  your  souls."  Here  first  His  sinlessness  is  declared  in  the 
most  positive  language,  from  the  clearness  of  which  no  one 
can  escape,  and  which  no  one  can  adopt  unto  himself,  without 
continuing  that  asseveration  of  John,  "  If  we  say  that  we  have 
no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.  If  we 
say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  Him  a  liar,  and  His 
word  is  not  in  us."  But  Peter  is  not  ashamed  to  say  of  the 
man  Jesus  Christ,  "  He  did  no  sin."  And  he  repeats  it, 
"  Neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth  ;"  that  is,  not  only  no 
actual  sin,  but  not  the  shade  or  guise  of  it,  no  ambiguity  nor 
lurking  purpose  of  deceiving,  no  variableness  nor  shadow  of 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE  WILL  OF  GOD.         37 

turning:,  and  not  only  so,  but  He  could  not  be  provoked  by 
any  means  to  the  participation  or  revenge  of  any  sin  ;  "  When 
He  was  reviled,  He  reviled  not  again:"  nor  could  by  any 
threatening,  or  punishment,  or  indignity,  or  fear,  be  tempted 
even  to  threaten  ;  albeit,  possessed  of  all  power  and  about 
to  execute  all  judgment ;  "  All  judgment  is  given  to  the 
Son  ; "  yet  so  was  He  bound  on  an  errand  of  grace  and  mercy, 
and  so  wound  up  to  perform  it  with  all  patience  of  the 
travail  and  gladness  to  pay  the  ransom,  that  "  when  He  suf- 
fered He  threatened  not,  but  committed  Himself  unto  Him 
that  judgeth  righteously."  By  which  frequent  reiteration, 
and  various  illustration  of  the  Lord's  sinlessness,  the  apostle 
having  prepared  the  way,  declareth  in  the  24th  verse  the 
same  doctrine  of  vicarious  suffering,  or  suffering  in  our  stead, 
as  is  declared  in  the  text  under  consideration,  "  who  His  own 
self,"  or,  as  it  is  in  the  original,  "  which  very  Person,"  that  is, 
this  sinless  One,  this  guileless  One,  "  bare  our  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  tree ;"  in  which  expression  is  contained,  not  only 
the  doctrine  of  vicarious  suffering,  which  we  are  inquiring 
into,  but  also  the  manner  of  it,  "in  His  own  body,"  concerning 
which  body  we  shall  speak  in  the  sequel  of  these  discourses. 
The  apostle  having  made  this  unequivocal  declaration  of  the 
great  doctrine  of  vicarious  suffering,  doth  not  leave  the  sub- 
ject, but  after  pursuing  on  the  exhortation  to  patience  under 
suffering,  for  which  he  had  introduced  it,  he  recurreth  to  the 
doctrine  the  second  time  in  the  words  of  the  passage  under 
consideration :  "  For  Christ  also  hath  suffered  for  sins,  the 
Just  for  the  unjust,"  and  now  addeth  the  great  reason  or 
cause  of  it,  "  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God."  Into  which  we 
shall  now  further  reverently  inquire  at  the  divine  oracle. 

"  That  He  might  bring  us  to  God  ;"  then  we  cannot  come 
to  God  as  we  are,  but  are  brought  to  Him  by  the  interven- 
tion of  this  great  act  of  "  the  Just  suffering  for  the  unjust." 
Why  not  come  to  God  as  we  are  .''  Because  it  is  written, 
"  Thou  art  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  wickedness,  neither 
shall  evil  dwell  with  thee ;  the  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy 
sight ;  thou  hatest  all  workers  of  iniquity."  And  again  : 
"  Thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canst  not 
look  on  iniquity."     The  reason  why  we  cannot  come  to  God 


38  THE  INCARNATION: 

as  we  are,  is  His  holiness,  which  repelleth  us,  which  repelled 
Adam,  which  repelled  the  angels,  and  will  for  ever  repell  all 
that  are  tainted  of  sin  ;  and  this  distance  from  God  is  the 
fertile  source  of  our  darkness,  of  our  doubt,  of  our  misery  ; 
wherefore  it  is  written,  that  before  Christ  can  deliver  up 
the  kingdom  unto  God,  even  the  Father,  He  must  first  put 
down,  or  rather  empty  out  of  it,  "  all  rule,  and  all  authority 
and  power,  and  reign  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies  under  His 
feet ;"  that  is,  He  must  make  the  kingdom  pure  and  spotless 
before  that  God,  even  the  Father,  will  look  upon  it.  Nay, 
more,  even  before  Christ  himself  will  take  His  Church  to  His 
embrace  ;  that  is,  before  He  will  be  married  to  her  in  the  age 
to  come  ;  before,  as  God,  He  will  look  upon  her  whom,  as 
man.  He  redeemed.  He  must  sanctify  and  "  cleanse  her  with 
the  washing  of  water  by  the  word,  that  He  might  present  her 
to  Himself  a  glorious  church,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or 
any  such  thing,  but  that  she  should  be  holy  and  without 
blemish."  And  to  this  end  it  is  that  the  dispensation  of  the 
cleansing  Spirit  interveneth  between  the  dispensation  of  the 
purchase  and  the  dispensation  of  the  possession.  The  Church 
was  purchased  by  the  incarnation  ;  she  is  now  washed  by  the 
Spirit,  that  He  may  present  her  to  Himself  a  glorious  Church, 
when  He  cometh  in  the  divinity  of  the  righteous  Judge,  or 
priestly  King,  to  enter  along  with  her,  and  introduce  her  into 
the  vicegerency  of  the  whole  earth,  as  Adam  was  heretofore 
introduced  into  the  probational  state  of  paradise,  prepara- 
tory to  the  vicegerency  of  the  whole  earth,  which  yet  he  had 
not  received,  but  would,  I  deem,  have  received,  if  he  had 
stood  the  proof  It  is  this  purity  of  the  Divine  substance, 
dear  brethren,  which  interposeth  an  eternal  barrier  to  our 
coming  near  to  God.  And  therefore  it  is  said,  Christ  "suffered, 
the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  unto  God;" 
for  Ave  shall  yet  be  brought  to  God  at  that  consummation  of 
all  things,  when  the  last  enemy,  which  is  death,  is  destroyed, 
and  the  kingdom  is  given  up  to  the  Father.  Then,  when  all 
is  pure  and  prepared  for  His  eye,  most  scorching  and  con- 
suming to  sin,  and  in  the  sight  of  which  the  heavens  are  not 
clean,  we  shall  be  brought  unto  Him,  whom  now  we  draw 
nigh  to,  only  through  the  Mediator  ;  and  now  the  Mediator 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         39 

having  done  His  office,  shall  be  Mediator  no  longer,  but  shall 
nign  Lord  and  King  and  visible  Godhead  of  the  universe. 
And  those  whose  nature  He  hath  for  ever  joined  to  the 
divine,  by  that  great  mediating  act  of  incarnation,  shall,  in 
the  fulness  of  time,  be  His  vicegerents  and  court  of  govern- 
nent  to  the  whole  created  universe.  If  you  inquire  whether 
this  purpose  or  use  of  the  vicarious  sufferings  of  Christ,  "that 
H«  might  bring  us  unto  God,"  be  a  common  and  familiar  idea 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  I  answer,  It  is  the  most  common, 
anc  the  most  familiar  idea  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Among 
hundreds  of  instances  take  the  following  : — 

Ol.  i.  19-23,  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should 
all  filness  dwell ;"  that  is,  fulness  of  power  as  the  Creator, 
whidi  had  just  been  declared  above,  and  fulness  of  power  as 
Heid  of  the  redeemed  Church,  which  is  the  vessel  of  His  ful- 
ness,the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all ;  and  all  fulness 
whabver  of  the  Godhead  which  was  proper  to  dwell  in  Him  ; 
and  i)r  what  end  .'' — "  Having  made  peace  by  the  blood  of  his 
cross,by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  himself.     By  him,  I 
say,  ^hether  they  be  things  in  earth  or  things  in  heaven." 
By  tht  "  all  things,  whether  upon  the  earth,  whether  in  the 
heaven,"  you  are  not  to  run  wild  and  understand  universal 
redemption  of  angels  and  men  ;  for  there  are  no  evil  angels  in 
heaven, nor  evil  men,  both  being  reserved  in  darkness  until 
the  jucxment  of  the  great   day.     It   means  simply  all  the 
things  uon  the  earth,  and  in  the  firmament  which  the  Jews 
called  tb  heavens  ;   that  is,  in  the  region  where  clouds  and 
tempest:  and  lightning  and  thunder,  and  other  the  most  vio- 
lent con-notions  of  the  elements  dwell.     On  which  account 
Satan   is  called  "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,"  and 
amongst  ur  enemies  are  enumerated  "  spiritual  wickednesses 
in  heaveiy  places."     But  the  dwelling-place  of  Gjod  is  the 
heaven  oiheavens,  or  the  third  heavens  ;  all  the  things  upon 
the  earth  nd  the  heavens  which  He  ©riginally  created,  visible 
and  invisile,  whether  they  be  thrones  or  dominions,  or  princi- 
palities or)owers,  are  represented  as  at  variance  and  in  strife 
with  God,  nd  needing  to  be  reconciled.    And  yet  a  few  verses 
above  theyxre  declared  to  have  been  created  both  by  Christ 
and  for  Chnt.     How  then  came  they  to  be  thus  in  opposition 


40  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

to  God  ?     No  doubt  by  the  invasion  of  sin  and  the  present 
possession  of  Satan,  the  invisible  power  who  ruletli  over  tha 
darkness  of  this  world.     And  how  are  they  to  be  reconciled  ? 
how   is   the  peace  between  all  the  creatures  and  God  to  te 
made  ?  It  is  answered/*  making  peace  by  the  blood  of  His  cross;' 
Wherefore  we  conclude  that  His  death  was  the  reconcilia- 
tion of  God  to  the  creatures,  His  body  the  peace-ofiferirg, 
which    being    offered  up,    a   dispensation    of    reconciliation 
might  begin  to  run  its  course,  but   not  till  then :    for  it?  is 
said,  "  by  Him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  Himself,  maWng 
peace  by  the  blood  of  His  cross."    It  is  further  to  be  obserfed, 
that  Christ  is  not  the  passive  victim  only,  through  whose  bbod 
the  reconciliation  is  brought  about,  but  also  the  active  minster 
by  whom  it  is  carried  on ;  by  Him  to  reconcile  all  things,  by 
Him  by  whom  they  were  created.     The  things  in  the  heavens 
and  on  the  earth,  which  fell  on  war  with  God  and  withone 
another,  and  which  are  still  at  war,  through  Adam's  dipbe- 
dience,  are,  by  the  obedience  of  the  Second  Adam  unto  cjbath, 
brought  back  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  ;  and  their  £con- 
ciliation  is  proceeding  according  to  the  rate  and  progres  ap- 
proved of  by  that  wisdom  which  dwelleth  in  Christ;  wli/refore 
the  gospel  is  called  the  ministry  of  reconciliation,  conpnitted 
unto  the  apostles  first,  and  now  unto  us,  the  ministers^bf  the 
Church.     "  Therefore  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  i^a  new 
creature  :  old  things  are  passed  away :  behold  all  thjgs  are 
become  new.     And  all  things  are  of  God,  who  hath  reonciled 
us  to  himself  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  hath  given  to  us  he  min- 
istry of  reconciliation ;  to  wit,  that  God  was  in  Chrjlt  recon- 
ciling the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  t^spasses 
unto  them ;  and  hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  ;f  recon- 
ciliation," (2  Cor.  V.  17-19-)     Wherefore  also  it  is  <^lled  the 
Gospel  of  Peace  ;  "preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ  ;land  was 
proclaimed  by  the  heavenly  host  "peace  on  eartl' — which 
language  were  not  only  unmeaning  but  false,  if  thiold  crea- 
tion, "  the  all  things,"  the  world,  were  not  in  a  stte  of  war 
with  God,  and  under  the  sentence  of  wrath.     Thisllienation, 
this  curse,  it  appears,  from  the  passage  under  consJeration,  is 
removed  from  them,  and  their  peace  made  by  the  pod  of  the 
cross  of  Christ    And  how  doth  this  great  peace-ocring  affect 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.        41 

the  souls  of  men  ?  The  apostle  immediately  addeth,  speak- 
ing to  the  church  of  the  Colossians,  and  in  them  to  the  Church 
of  the  Gentiles  universally,  "  And  you  that  were  some  time  " 
(or  heretofore)  "  alienated  and  enemies  in  your  mind  by  wicked 
works  hath  He  reconciled."  This  then  is  the  natural  estate  of 
all  the  men  of  the  world ;  for  the  Church,  whose  former  state 
it  is  declared  to  have  been,  is  gathered  out  of  every  kindred, 
and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation.  And  what  state  is  this  ? 
"Alienated  and  enemies  by  disposition  in  wicked  works  ;"  the 
disposition  of  the  mind  or  the  will  being  averse  and  inimical 
from  God.  For  that  which  is  here  translated  mind,  is  the 
same  which  is  changed  by  repentance ;  for  "  mind "  and 
"  repentance  "  are  the  same  word  in  Greek  compounded  with 
a  different  preposition.  This  which  requires  to  be  changed,  is 
by  nature  alienated  from,  and  at  open  war  with,  God,  and  this 
is  shewn  forth  and  expressed  in  wicked  works;  but  these  works 
are  only  the  evidences  and  fruits  of  the  evil,  and  not  the  evil 
itself,  which  is  more  deeply  seated  in  the  mind  alienated  from, 
and  at  war  with,  God.  This  declaration  of  the  natural  state 
of  men  brings  to  our  mind  what  Paul  says  in  another  Epistle 
(Eph.  ii.  1-3)  :  "  And  you  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins  ;  wherein  in  time  past  ye  walked  accord- 
ing to  the  course  of  this  world,  according  to  the  prince  of  the 
power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children 
of  disobedience  :  among  whom  also  we  all  had  our  conversa- 
tion in  times  past  in  the  lusts  of  our  flesh,  fulfilling  the  desires 
of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind  ;  and  were  by  nature  the  chil- 
dren of  wrath,  even  as  others."  And  what  becometh  of  such 
alienated  sinners,  such  active  enemies  of  God  and  ministers 
of  evil,  as  we  are  here  described  to  be  .'*  Observe  what  fol- 
lows— "  Yet  now  hath  he  reconciled  in  the  body  of  his  flesh 
through  death."  The  peace  of  all  creatures  was  made  through 
the  blood  of  His  cross,  and  the  reconciliation  of  His  Church 
is  made  "  in  the  body  of  His  flesh  by  means  of  death  ;"  which 
expressions  exactly  agree  to  what  we  have  already  seen  in 
Peter,  and  contain  this  mystery,  that  the  body  of  Christ's 
flesh,  or  His  human  nature,  the  part  of  Him  which  could 
suffer  and  die,  hath  become  by  its  death  the  reconciliation  of 
the  Church,  and  will  become  the  peace  of  the  world.     This  is 


42  THE  INCARNATION: 

the  seed  which  had  to  be  cast  into  the  ground  in  order  to  bear 
much  fruit ;  the  handful  of  corn  cast  out  upon  the  top  of  the 
mountains,  which  is  to  fill  the  whole  earth  with  prosperous 
fruit ;  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 
This  humanity  of  Christ,  therefore,  being  offered  upon  the 
cross,  accomplisheth  the  reconciliation  of  the  Church  and  the 
future  pacification  of  the  world.     With  respect  to  the  Church 
of  which  at  present  we  inquire,  it  is  further  added  here  as 
everywhere,  that  the  end  of  this  reconciliation  is  "  to  present 
you  holy  and  unblamable  and  unreprovable  in  His  sight."    In 
whose  sight }     In  the  sight  of  God,  even  the  Father,  who  is 
accomplishing  this  great  work  of  reconciling  all  things  unto 
Himself  by  His  Son,  "  who  is  in  Christ  reconciling  all  things 
to  Himself"     But  this  glorious  presentation  of  the  Church 
hath  not,  neither  can  have  place,  until  she  is  made  holy,  un- 
blamable, and  unreprovable,  because  evil  cannot  stand  in  the 
sight  of  God.     At  present  the  Church  is  under  the  sanctifying 
operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     That  same  Spirit  will  raise 
her  body  from  the  dead,  which  wrought  in  Christ  to  raise  Him 
from  the  dead.     Then  shall  we  have  to  serve  Him  in  His 
kingdom  ;  for  which  end  He  did  call,  and  choose,  and  sanctify 
us  during  this  reign  of  evil,  that  when  the  fulness  of  times 
shall  come  for  gathering  together  the  "  all  things  "  into  Him, 
we  might  serve  for  His  ministers,  the  hands,  the  feet,  the 
tongue,  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  every  member  of  that  universal 
government  which   He  is  then  to  exercise  over  the  earth  ; 
after  which  honourable  fellowship  of  His  glorious  and  active 
government   of  power,   we  shall,    as    His    spouse,   with    all 
those,  the  children  of  our  mutual  love  and  care,  with  this 
earth,  their  purified  and  blessed  abode,  be  presented  to  the 
Father,  who  thenceforward  shall  be  all  in  all — that  is,  shall 
be  manifest  in  His  glorious  Son,  directly  owning,  directly 
governing,  directly  blessing  the  world,  with  all  the  dwellers 
therein  for  ever  and  ever ;  or,  if  it  seem  meet,  advancing  us 
to  whatever  power  and  honourable  ofiice  may  seem  good  unto 
Himself 

We  have  thus  ascertained  that  Christ's  sufferings  were  vica- 
rious, and  His  death  was  the  reconciling  of  the  world;  and  that 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE  WILL  OF  GOD.         43 

atonement  for  sin  is  an  essential  part  of  the  Divine  purpose 
in  the  incarnation  of  His  Son.  Let  us  proceed  a  step  farther, 
and  consider  what  is  revealed  in  Scripture  concerning  the 
communication  or  application  of  the  fruits  of  His  work  unto 
others,  for  this  also  is  an  essential  part  of  the  idea  of  the 
atonement.  And  for  this  end  we  choose  out  a  passage  in 
the  third  chapter  of  the  Romans,  at  the  twenty-third  verse, 
which  casts  a  very  steady  light  upon  this  part  of  the  subject. 
You  observe,  that  it  sets  out  by  stating  the  great  proposi- 
tion of  the  world's  sinfulness,  which  the  apostle  had  been 
proving  throughout  the  preceding  chapters  of  that  epistle, 
both  by  the  observation  of  the  fact  and  by  the  word  of  God. 
"  For  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God." 
And  to  this  great  proposition  He  adds  the  natural  and  neces- 
sary inference,  that  their  justification  must  proceed  from 
grace  and  not  from  works ;  from  mercy  and  not  from  desert ; 
for  if  we  have  all  sinned,  our  desert  is  death,  according  to  the 
constitution  of  the  Creator,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die:" 
wherefore  the  apostle  addeth,  "Being  justified  freely  by  his 
grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The 
procuring  cause  is  Christ's  redemption  of  us.  Redemption 
from  what?  Doubtless  from  the  curse — that  curse  which 
passed  upon  all  men,  because  that  all  have  sinned.  From 
the  curse  of  the  law  we  are  redeemed  by  Jesus,  who  became 
a  curse  for  us,  that  we  might  become  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  Him.  And  in  this  consists  the  grace  of  God  ;  not  in 
justifying  us, — for  justification,  as  its  name  imports,  is  an  act 
of  justice  and  not  of  grace, — but  in  giving  us  His  Son, 
through  whom  we  might  be  justified.  His  grace,  and  love, 
and  goodness,  and  mercy,  do  all  consist  in  the  best  gift  of 
His  only-begotten  and  v/ell-beloved  Son  ;  which  if  Ave  would 
keep  steadily  in  view,  it  would  silence  all  scruples  and  remove 
all  difficulties  out  of  the  way.  There  was  nothing  surely  to 
hinder  God  from  giving  us  His  Son.  It  were  boldness,  blas- 
phemy, and  ingratitude  insufferable  to  say  He  might  not  give 
us  His  Son  if  so  it  pleased  Him.  No  creature  will  surely 
interfere  between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Well,  then.  He 
gives  us  His  Son  ;  and  Christ  being  given,  all  that  follows  is 
holiness,  is  justice,  is  strenuous  hatred  of  sin,  and  destruction 


44  THE  INCARNATION: 

of  the  dwellings  and  habitations  of  sinfulness,  yea,  even  of 
Christ's  own  flesh.  Accordingly  it  is  immediately  added, 
"  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation."  This  is 
the  end  for  which  He  hath  proposed  Him  to  be  a  propitia- 
tion ;  that  is,  a  great  mediation  or  means  of  reconciliation,  an 
atonement ;  not  a  propitiator  but  a  propitiation,  and  at  the 
same  time  the  propitiator ;  as  He  calleth  Himself  the  way, 
"  I  am  the  way ;  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me." 
There  is  something,  to  my  mind,  exceedingly  powerful  in 
such  expressions  :  "  I  am  the  Resurrection,"  not  the  raiser  of 
the  dead ;  "  I  am  the  Truth,"  not  the  true  one  ;  "  I  am  the 
Life,  I  am  the  Light,"  not  the  creator  of  life  and  light ;  "  whom 
God  hath  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and 
sanctification,  and  redemption;" — all  similar  to  the  passage 
before  us,  "  whom  God  hath  set  forth,"  or  foreordained  "  to 
be  a  propitiation."  These  expressions  shew  me  the  substance 
of  the  redemption,  as  well  as  the  operation,  to  be  in  Him ; 
the  matter  of  it,  as  well  as  the  workmanship ;  the  forming  of 
the  elements  out  of  nothing,  as  well  as  the  bringing  of  them 
into  order ;  which  is  all  set  forth  in  that  single  word,  "  If  any 
man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature."  Of  Him,  as  well  as 
by  Him  and  for  Him,  are  all  the  parts  of  the  redemption,  as 
well  as  of  the  original  creation.  Now  this  propitiation,  which 
God  hath  set  Him  forth  to  be,  is  not  inherited  otherwise  than 
by  faith;  "through  faith;"  and  that  a  distinct  act  of  faith 
"  in  His  blood,"  or  upon  His  death.  No  doubt  this  hath 
reference  to  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice,  which  God  allowed  not 
to  be  eaten,  but  to  be  offered  up  as  its  life.  "  And  almost 
everything  by  the  law  was  purged  with  blood,  and  without 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  Which  was  an 
ordinance  of  express  purpose  appointed  to  preserve  in  the 
Church  a  very  sacred  apprehension  of  the  blood  of  Christ 
which  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  Faith  upon  the  sacrifice  which 
He  offered  on  the  cross,  is  that  by  which  we  enter  into  the 
inheritance  of  the  propitiation  which  God  hath  been  pleased 
to  place  in  Him.  The  apostle  might  have  stopped  here,  as 
completing  the  truth,  but  he  delights  to  enlarge ;  and,  for  our 
special  teaching  in  this  matter,  he  addeth,  "  To  declare  His 
righteousness,  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past."     This 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.        45 

gives  us  another  view  of  the  work  of  Christ,  not  as  suffering, 
but  as  righteousness, — that  is,  active  obedience,  which  is 
transferable  to  others,  and  apphcable  for  the  remission  of 
sins,  "  To  declare  His  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins." 
I  know  not  any  language  by  which  the  doctrine  of  imputed 
righteousness  could  be  more  simply  and  ingenuously  declared ; 
nor  do  I  know  what  more  can  be  wanted  to  justify  that  great 
doctrine  of  the  Church.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  well  guarded 
by  the  word  "past"  against  all  the  abuses  to  which  it  might 
be  applied  for  the  indulgence  of  wickedness,  or  the  encou- 
ragement of  that  blasphemous  temper  which  saith,  "  Let  us 
sin,  that  grace  may  abound."  It  is  all  in  all  to  the  poor  soul 
which  is  stricken  with  the  contrition  of  sin,  and  knoweth  not 
whither  to  flee,  to  hear  of  a  fountain  opened  in  the  house  of 
David  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  But  this  hath  no  possible 
indulgence  for  the  future,  being  only  to  cleanse  the  perilous 
load  from  the  conscience,  that  it  may  be  free  to  believe  in  the 
Lord  as  "  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  re- 
mission of  sins;"  and,  so  believing,  to  receive  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  by  which  to  depart  from  all  sin, — these  two  gifts, 
remission  and  repentance,  being  coeval  in  their  birth  and 
co-ordinate  in  their  progressive  growth.  Wherefore  it  is  writ- 
ten, in  the  5th  chapter  of  this  epistle,  "  Therefore,  as  by  the 
offence  of  one  man  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condemna- 
tion ;  even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  the  free  gift  came 
upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life.  For  as  by  one  man's 
disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of 
one  shall  many  be  made  righteous."  From  which  illustration 
we  gather,  that  there  is  a  certain  measure  and  proportion  be- 
tween the  consequences  of  Adam's  sin  and  of  Christ's  right- 
eousness, and  the  imputation  of  the  same  to  their  children. 
And  I  have  no  doubt  that,  if  we  could  search  this  depth  of 
God  to  the  bottom,  it  would  be  found  that  the  same  constitu- 
tion of  mankind  which  made  it  righteous  in  God  to  visit  the 
sins  of  the  father  upon  the  children,  did  also  make  it  possible 
to  visit  the  righteousness  of  the  father  upon  the  children. 
The  first  Adam  hath  become  an  evil  leaven  unto  his  posterity; 
the  second  Adam  hath  become  a  quickening  spirit.  But  there 
is  no  necessity  binding  God  to  accept  this  propitiation  which 


46  .      THE  INCARNA  TION : 

He  himself  hath  set  forth ;  for  then  we  could  plead  a  right, 
and  would  be  rendered  independent  of  grace.  Wherefore  it  is 
added,  "through  the  forbearance  of  God;"  to  signify  that  it  is 
an  act  of  God's  forbearance  not  to  visit  our  sins  with  their 
proper  punishment,  but  to  remit  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ. 
And  hence  it  is  our  constant  custom  in  all  the  churches 
to  deprecate  the  wrath  of  God,  and  to  entreat  Him  to  ac- 
cept the  offering  which  Christ  hath  made,  and  to  give 
us  absolution  from  our  sins  in  His  blood.  So  very  wisely 
is  this  grand  inference  from  the  first  three  chapters  of 
the  Romans,  guarded  and  defended  from  abuse.  But  further 
still,  it  is  added  to  all  this,  "  To  declare  at  this  time  his 
righteousness,  that  he  might  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  him 
which  believeth  in  Jesus,"  which  brings  us  to  the  plain  and 
categorical  answer  of  the  difficulty  we  proposed,  declaring 
simply,  that  the  only  means  for  reconciling  His  justice  with 
the  justification  of  believing  sinners,  is  the  righteousness  of 
Christ  which  was  for  this  end  declared  openly  unto  all  men. 
True  it  is,  therefore,  that  God  can  be  just  and  the  justifier  of 
the  man  who  believeth  in  Jesus.  And  the  way  by  which  He 
can  be  so,  is  by  the  declaration  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ. 
And  that  there  is  no  other  way,  we  know  assuredly,  from  such 
passages  of  Scripture  as  these :  "  There  is  no  name  given 
among  men,  whereby  they  can  be  saved,  but  the  name  of 
Jesus."  "  For  if  righteousness  could  come  by  the  law,  then 
is  Christ  dead  in  vain." 

Observe  now  how  this  doctrine  of  atonement  affects  the  prac- 
tice of  holiness,  whereof  we  have  argued  so  strenuously  that  no 
infraction  may  or  can  take  place.  We  are  thereby  comforted 
against  the  venomous  and  opprobrious  rage  of  Satan,  who, 
after  having  brought  us  into  sin  and  misery,  doth  darken  and 
overcloud  the  conscience  with  a  sense  of  sin,  and  would 
thereby  shut  up  all  avenues  to  the  grace  of  God.  But  by 
Christ,  our  propitiation  and  atonement,  we  are  assured  that 
our  sins  are  forgiven  us,  if  we  have  faith  in  the  blood  of  Jesus 
which  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  And,  therefore,  in  all  our  spiri- 
tual diseases  we  look  unto  Him  as  to  the  serpent  lifted  up, 
which  is  to  draw  all  men  after  Him,  and  we  come  unto  Him  as 
the  chief  Physician  of  the  soul  and  the  body,  and  we  believe  in 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         47 

Him  as  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the 
world ;  whereby  our  souls  are  exceedingly  comforted  under 
the  sense  of  past  sin.  And  thus  being  comforted  in  Christ, 
our  love  to  Him  aboundeth.  Yet  in  this  act  of  faith  upon 
His  propitiation  for  past  sin,  we  forget  not  the  grace  of  the 
Father,  His  forbearance  and  long-suffering,  and  that  even 
until  now  and  always,  it  is  of  His  free  will  to  accept  the 
offering  and  acquit  us,  and  to  regard  us  as  righteous  in  His 
sight.  By  the  which  will  of  the  Father,  we  are  sanctified  by 
the  offering  of  the  body  of  Christ  once  for  all.  The  same 
Divine  doctrine  moveth  us  to  a  continual  activity  and  per- 
severance in  sanctification.  For  this  was  the  end  of  His  suffer- 
ing, that  He  might  purify  us  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people 
zealous  of  good  works,  that  He  might  bring  us  unto  God. 
And  he  who,  reposing  on  Christ  for  forgiveness  of  sin,  is  not 
thereby  stimulated  to  the  attainment  of  all  righteousness,  doth 
turn  the  grace  of  God  into  licentiousness,  and  trample  under 
foot  the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  should  have  been 
sanctified.  He  is  likewise  doing  despite  unto  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  grace  ;  and  we  were  safer  in  slighting  the  incarnation  and 
atonement  of  the  Son  of  man,  against  whom  sin  may  be  for- 
given, than  in  slighting  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  against  whom 
if  we  persevere  in  sin,  it  shall  neither  be  forgiven  in  this 
world  nor  the  world  to  come.  The  burden  is  thus  removed 
from  our  shoulder,  that  we  may  pursue  the  journey  of  obedi- 
ence with  the  more  expedition ;  the  encompassing  weight  is 
cast  aside  from  our  loins,  that  Ave  may  run  the  race  of  holi- 
ness with  the  more  haste.  We  cannot  be  brought  near 
to  God  unless  we  be  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  sepa- 
rate from  sinners,  as  was  our  High  Priest.  We  are  not 
Christ's  disciples,  unless  we  keep  all  His  commandments, 
and  not  otherwise  shall  we  have  the  indwelling  of  the 
Son  and  of  the  Father ;  because  where  the  Holy  Ghost  hath 
not  come  to  regenerate,  they  will  not  come  to  build  up,  com- 
fort, and  sustain.  Therefore,  brethren,  we  who  believe  in  the 
Cross  of  Christ,  are  dead  unto  sin,  that  we  should  live  unto 
God.  Out  of  this  Divine  doctrine  of  atonement  cometh 
patience  also  under  the  sufferings  which  are  laid  upon  us  by 
the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh ;  forasmuch  as  we  know 


48  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

that  hereunto  we  are  called,  for  Christ  also  once  suffered  for 
us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  we  should  follow  His  steps. 
This  is  the  use  which  Peter  maketh  of  the  doctrine ;  that  so 
we  also  should  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake :  "  For  this  is 
thank-worthy,  if  a  man  for  conscience  toward  God  endure  grief 
suffering  wrongfully,"  (i  Pet.  ii.  19.)  "But  if  ye  suffer 'for 
righteousness'  sake,  happy  are  ye :  and  be  not  afraid  of  their 
terror,  neither  be  troubled,"  (chap.  iii.  14.)  And  Paul  is  very 
bold  in  the  first  chapter  of  Colossians,  saying  immediately 
after  the  passage  quoted  above,  verses  23,  24 — "  If  ye  con- 
tinue in  the  faith  grounded  and  settled,  and  be  not  moved 
away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  which  ye  have  heard,  and 
which  was  preached  to  every  creature  which  is  under  heaven; 
whereof  I  Paul  am  made  a  minister :  who  now  rejoice  in  my 
sufferings  for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the 
afflictions  of  Christ  in  my  flesh  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is 
the  church."  And  in  like  manner  we  should  bear  patiently 
whatever  we  are  called  to  endure  for  Christ's  sake,  as  suffer- 
ing together  with  Him  and  for  the  good  of  His  Church, 
which  is  His  body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all, 
according  as  it  is  written  in  another  place,  to  comfort  the 
brethren  under  fiery  trials — "  Wherefore  seeing  we  also  are 
compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us 
lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset 
us,  and  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us," 
(Heb.  xii.  i.)  Without  all  controversy,  therefore,  this  doc- 
trine of  atonement,  while  it  hath  its  origin  in  God's  holiness, 
hath  its  fruits  also  in  the  promotion  of  holiness  in  all  who 
receive  it.  And  so  we  shut  up  the  question  of  the  origin  of 
the  incarnation,  having  shewn  from  Scripture,  and  likewise 
from  reason,  so  far  as  our  light  of  reason  can  embrace  the 
subject,  that  its  first  cause  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else  but  in 
the  holy  will  of  God. 

From  the  passages  of  Scripture,  which  are  the  groundwork 
of  the  preceding  remarks,  it  doth  clearly  appear  that  our 
Lord  and  the  apostles  never  fail  to  take  a  higher  view  of  the 
incarnation  than  as  one  of  the  events  of  time  and  occurrences 
of  this  fallen  world ;  contemplating  it  as  an  act  of  the  God- 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         49 

head,  done  from  all  eternity,  purposed  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  prearranged  and  foreordained  in  all  its  parts,  to 
this  very  end  of  manifesting  unto  all  intelligent  creatures 
the  glory  of  God's  holiness  and  grace  in  the  salvation  and 
forgiveness  of  sinful  and  apostate  creatures ;  that  it  was  not 
an  act  consequent  upon  the  fall,  though  taking  its  form 
and  character  thence,  but  an  eternal  purpose,  which  God 
purposed  in  Himself  before  the  world  was,  to  the  praise  of 
the  glory  of  His  grace.  This  view  of  the  subject,  notwith- 
standing that  it  is  so  constantly  taken  in  the  Scriptures,  hath 
grown  into  such  disuse  in  the  Church  that  it  cannot  be  pre- 
sented without  much  explanation,  and  without  answering 
that  most  seductive  question.  What  is  the  good  of  it  ?  What 
is  the  use  of  it  ?  And  rather  to  be  profitable  unto  your  souls, 
dear  brethren,  than  to  indulge  this  common  form  of  all 
ignorant  gainsayers,  I  shall  a  little  open  the  good  use  of 
these  higher  views. 

It  seemeth  to  me,  that  a  pious  and  believing  soul,  which 
desireth,  with  all  its  might,  to  return  back  again  to  God,  and 
lose  its  will  in  His  most  holy  will,  can  in  no  way  be  so  re- 
freshed as  in  studying  to  know  the  purposes  of  that  will,  into 
the  likeness  of  which  it  hasteth  to  be  reduced,  and  longeth  to 
be  transformed  ;  and  in  order  to  satisfy  this  noble  desire  of 
the  renewed  mind,  God  hath  taken  the  veil  from  off  the 
secrets  of  His  purposes,  and  condescended  to  teach  us,  not 
only  by  outward  appearances,  and  manifestations  of  His  holy 
providence  and  gracious  redemption,  but  also  by  the  know- 
ledge of  the  eternal  principles  in  His  divine  nature,  from 
which  they  proceed,  and  the  eternal  ends  of  peace  and  blessed- 
ness whereto  they  minister,  and  wherein  they  shall  result. 
And  this  hath  He  done  not  only  in  gracious  condescension 
to  our  desire  of  knowledge,  and  effectual  furtherance  of  our 
desire  of  conformity  to  His  mind  and  will,  but  also,  in  great 
wisdom,  to  comfort  and  establish  our  minds  in  Christ  Jesus, 
to  root  us  and  ground  us  in  that  holy  truth  which  He  hath 
delivered  unto  us,  and  wholly  to  free  us  from  all  fear  of  acci- 
dent, and  change,  and  circumstance  ;  from  all  fear  of  adver- 
sity, temptation,  and  outward  violence.  There  is  no  peace, 
there  is  no  rest,  there  is  no  contentment  to  the  soul,  until  it  is 
VOL.  V.  D 


50  THE  INCARNATION: 

delivered  from  the  fear  of  change  and  fluctuation  ;  nor  is 
there  any  activity,  or  bravery,  or  steady  conduct  in  the  soul, 
until  it  feeleth  itself  all  directed,  wound  up,  and  steadfastly 
bent  upon  some  great  end  which  it  knoweth  to  be  within  its 
reach.  Now  when  God  purposed  by  His  Son  to  deliver  our 
souls  from  such  an  oppression  of  the  flesh,  and  the  world, 
and  Satan,  as  they  presently  labour  under,  in  what  way 
could  they  have  been  awakened  to  such  a  fearful,  to  such  a 
fiery  contest  with  all  manner  of  oppressors,  as  by  presenting 
to  them  the  warrant  of  their  final  perseverance  and  success, 
brought  direct  from  the  archives  of  the  Eternal  and  Almighty 
God,  the  covenant  of  their  complete  deliverance  from  sin, 
and  reinvestment  in  righteousness,  sealed  in  the  blood  of  His 
only-begotten  and  well-beloved  Son  ?  I  do  not  say  that  this 
is  effectual  to  rouse  the  deep  sleep  of  all  to  whom  it  is  made 
known ;  but  I  know  that  the  deep  sleep  of  no  one  was  ever 
otherwise  broken,  or  his  active  warfare  otherwise  maintained. 
For  though  many  indeed  by  something  less  arouse  men  from 
their  lethargy,  as,  for  example,  by  merely  preaching  the  free 
and  open  gospel  of  forgiveness  and  reconciliation,  they  shall 
never  carry  them  forward  against  all  hindrances  to  perfection, 
or,  against  all  doubts,  settle  them  in  fixed  assurance,  other- 
wise than  by  shewing  them  the  Divine  purpose  from  all  eter- 
nity to  redeem  as  many  as  shall  believe  on  His  Son.  And  it 
is  the  unalterable  fixedness  thereof  which  gives  the  believer 
constancy  against  the  moody  frames  of  the  natural  man, 
which  carries  him  buoyant  over  all  the  billows  of  the  adverse 
and  tempestuous  world,  and  gives  him  clear  discernment 
through  all  the  mists  and  exhalations  of  hell  which  Satan's 
delusion  is  ever  spreading  over  the  soul.  A  conditional 
gospel  can  redeem  no  man  from  this  conditional  state  of 
being  ;  it  would  only  add  another  puzzling  perplexity  to  the 
many  which  the  fall  hath  introduced.  We  want  a  Rock  to 
rest  our  weary  foot  upon  ;  we  want  a  Light  in  which  there  is 
no  variableness  nor  shadow  of  turning,  whereby  to  guide  our 
uncertain  course ;  or,  to  speak  without  a  figure,  we  want  a 
Will  unalterable  and  unchangeable,  whose  purposes  are  dis- 
closed to  us,  according  to  which  we  may  rectify  all  our  errors 
and  wanderings,  and  thereto  conform  ourselves  with  all  our 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         51 

might.  But  if  that  will  be  not  itself  constant,  if  it  also  be 
conditional,  or  if  it  be  not  revealed  and  manifest,  or,  finally, 
if  it  bear  no  tender  and  loving  regard  to  us,  or  if  it  leave  any 
doubt  over  the  issue  of  the  contest,  no  one  will  arise  and  gird 
himself  to  the  battle.  For  it  is  no  ordinary  battle  upon  an 
equal  footing  ;  but  it  is  the  battle  of  the  weak  against  the 
mighty ;  of  one  against  a  host  ;  of  a  new-born  child  against 
the  powers  of  flesh  and  blood,  against  principalities  and 
powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world  and 
spiritual  wickednesses  in  high  places.  If  there  be  the  shadow 
of  a  doubt,  I  say  again,  resting  over  the  issue  of  such  a  con- 
test,— if  its  success  be  not  assured  and  pledged  to  us  by 
Divine  power  and  the  Almighty  unchangeable  will,  no  mortal 
man  will  ever  arise  and  take  the  field  ;  or,  if  he  should,  (and 
some  certainly  do  take  the  field  without  the  knowledge  or 
the  faith  of  this  eternal  purpose,)  then  mark,  that  he  will 
make  a  poor  debate  with  the  enemy,  and  come  to  parley  and 
to  terms  of  accommodation,  upon  being  permitted  any  salvo 
to  his  honour,  which  the  cunning  one  is  ever  willing  to  proffer. 
Therefore  it  is  no  small  matter  which  we  are  handling,  but 
the  root  of  the  matter,  the  great  quickening,  enlivening,  and 
conquering  principle  of  the  warfare,  even  the  will  of  God  for 
our  salvation  :  and  for  our  greater  confirmation  let  us  turn 
together  and  read  a  passage  of  St  Paul,  where  he  employs 
the  doctrine  to  this  very  end,  (Rom.  viii.  28-39,) — "  And  we 
know  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  God,  to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to  his  pur- 
pose. For  whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did  predestinate 
to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,  that  he  might  be 
the  first-born  among  many  brethren.  Moreover,  whom  he 
did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called  ;  and  whom  he  called, 
them  he  also  justified  ;  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also 
glorified.  What  shall  we  then  say  to  these  things  .-•  If  God 
be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  He  that  spared  not  his 
own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with 
him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  .''  Who  shall  lay  anything 
to  the  charge  of  God's  elect }  It  is  God  that  justifieth  ;  who 
is  he  that  condemneth  .-'  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather, 
that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who 


5 2  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

also  maketh  intercession  for  us.  Who  shall  separate  us  from 
the  love  of  Christ  ?  Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecu- 
tion, or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  (As  it  is 
written,  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long ;  we 
are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter.)  Nay,  in  all  these 
things  we  are  more  than  conquerors,  through  him  that  loved 
us.  For  I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor 
things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature, 
shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

But  besides  this,  I  have  to  observe,  that  if  we  fix  not  our 
continual  attention  upon  the  purpose  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  only  ground  of  our  salvation,  we  will  be  tempted  to 
look  somewhere  else ;  and  the  effect  of  looking  anywhere  else 
will  be  fatal.  Of  these  false  foundations  of  trust,  I  perceive 
two  especially  which  mislead  men.  The  one  is,  to  look  to 
the  outward  visible  Church,  and  the  other  to  look  to  the 
fruits  thereof  within  themselves, — the  former  giving  rise  to 
formality,  the  latter  to  mysticism.  The  greater  part  of  pro- 
fessors look  to  the  outward  visible  Church,  or  what  I  would 
call  the  manifestation  of  God's  purpose,  instead  of  looking  to 
the  mind  and  will  which  are  manifested  therein.  And  the 
consequence  is,  that  they  are  led  blindly  and  timorously 
under  the  spirit  of  bondage  and  fear.  Instead  of  being  acted 
upon  in  their  will  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  acted  upon 
in  their  understanding,  or  in  their  natural  feeling,  or  in  their 
bodily  sense  by  those  parts  of  the  revelation  which  severally 
address  these  several  parts  of  their  being.  But  not  acknow- 
ledging the  supreme  purpose  and  will  which  actuates  the 
whole  body  of  the  revelation,  their  own  will  remains  unsub- 
dued and  entire  amidst  all  their  formality  of  worship,  and 
orthodoxy  of  faith,  and  practice  of  charity,  and  excitement 
of  feeling.  Of  which  formalists  there  are  as  many  separate 
classes  as  there  are  different  parts  of  the  natural  man  to  be 
acted  upon ;  some  of  the  sense  merely,  some  of  the  feelings, 
some  of  the  understanding ;  but  inasmuch  as  the  will  is  un- 
renewed, and  it  never  can  be  renewed  without  comprehending 
the  purposes  of  God  (for  the  meaning  of  a  renewed  will  is 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         53 

that  its  purposes  are  in  accordance  with  the  purposes  of  God,) 
— inasmuch,  I  say,  as  the  will  is  not  renewed  and  bears  still 
according  to  nature,  there  must  subsist  in  all  such  religionists 
a  spirit  of  bondage ;  and  I  very  much  doubt  whether  there 
can  exist  in  them  the  spirit  of  adoption,  which  is  not  the 
spirit  of  fear  but  of  love.  Into  this  matter  I  cannot  enter  at 
length  ;  and  it  has  been  indirectly  touched  upon  already,  in 
what  I  have  said  concerning  the  submission  of  the  will  of 
Christ  to  the  purposes  of  God,  in  which  He  delighted.  There 
is  a  oneness,  a  simplicity  of  purpose  in  the  Divine  acts  and 
revelations  which  is  as  it  were  the  soul  and  life  of  them ;  the 
uniformity  in  their  variety.  And  so  also  in  the  life  of  a 
believer  there  ought  to  be  the  same  oneness  and  simplicity  of 
purpose,  which  may  be  the  life  and  soul  of  all  his  obedience, 
and  form  the  community  of  the  Spirit  in  the  variety  and 
diversity  of  our  gifts  and  graces.  Now,  I  say  that  no  one 
will  obtain  this  common  spirit  of  a  son  save  by  knowing  and 
studying  the  will  of  our  common  Father.  Otherwise  our 
personality  becomes  lost  and  frittered  away  amidst  an  infinite 
variety  of  duties  and  engagements,  of  thoughts  and  opinions, 
and  every  one  runneth  wildly  after  his  own  natural  disposi- 
tion, instead  of  all  submitting  to  the  will  of  God ;  and  the 
end  is  confusion,  and  sectarianism,  and  schism,  and  every  evil 
work.  Of  so  much  importance  is  it  to  have  our  souls  bent 
unto  the  contemplation  of  the  purpose  of  God,  by  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Besides  these  formalities  (for  I  call  everything  a  for- 
mality in  which  the  renewed  will  is  not)  there  is  another 
object  to  which  spiritual  divines  are  wont  to  turn  the  atten- 
tion of  believers,  as  the  ground  of  consolation  and  assur- 
ance— namely,  to  the  growth  of  grace  and  holiness  in  their 
own  souls,  or  to  what  is  commonly  called  Christian  ex- 
perience. But  into  this  I  enter  not  at  present;  for  it  is 
too  large  and  important  a  matter  to  be  dealt  with  slightly. 
Only  I  will  say,  in  passing,  that  it  is  not  a  principle  or  origin, 
but  an  effect  derived  from  something  else,  and  therefore  not 
depending  on  itself,  it  is  therefore  not  fit  to  rest  upon. 
Besides,  it  is  full  of  imperfection,  change,  and  cloudy  uncer- 
tainty ;  the  light  having  to  pass  through  the  dark  and  dense 


54  THE  INCARNATION: 

medium  of  the  flesh,  which  doth  obscure  it  at  times,  and  at 
times  modify  it,  and  at  times  extinguish  it  altogether.  It  is 
looking  upon  the  earth  for  the  proof  and  assurance  of  the 
sun's  steady  light,  instead  of  looking  at  the  sun  himself  But 
we  insist  not. 

Suffice  it,  dear  brethren,  to  have  given  you  a  little  insight 
into  the  purpose  of  God  to  justify  His  own  holiness  in  the  salva- 
tion of  sinners  by  the  incarnation  of  His  Son,  and  likewise  to 
have  shewn  you  the  superlative  importance  of  this  higher 
theology,  which  they  commonly  stigmatise  by  calling  it  Cal- 
vmism,  but  which  is  in  truth  the  theology  of  the  apostles,  as 
we  proved  ;  the  theology  of  the  Reformers,  and  of  the  Non- 
conformists, and  of  every  denomination  of  men  in  whom  God 
hath  placed  the  testimony  of  His  Son,  and  by  whom  He  hath 
built  up  or  repaired  the  walls  of  His  Church.  Therefore  I 
do,  with  the  more  confidence,  entreat  you,  brethren,  to  medi- 
tate the  purpose  of  God  in  sending  His  Son,  and  your  own 
election  in  Jesus  Christ  before  the  world  was ;  your  election 
to  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  Him  in  love,  and  conse- 
quently your  perseverance  in  holiness,  and  your  full  assur- 
ance thereof  unto  the  end.  This  fulness  of  the  decree  and 
purpose  which  He  hath  purposed  in  Himself  before  the  world 
was,  is  the  assurance  of  the  Church ;  and  it  is  the  overture 
which  the  Church  maketh  to  the  sinful  world.  We  wish  you 
all  to  enter  into  this  security  :  we  hinder  none,  but  invite  all. 
Is  the  invitation  less'^acceptable,  because  you  are  assured  of 
salvation  .-*  Is  the  voyage  less  welcome  because  the  vessel  is 
well  found,  and  hath  a  blessing  of  God  upon  her,  which  will 
make  her  ride  out  every  storm  .''  Is  the  house  less  inviting 
because  when  the  winds  arise,  and  the  rains  descend,  and  beat 
upon  the  house,  it  falleth  not,  and  cannot  fall,  because  it  is 
built  upon  a  rock  ?  Finally,  is  the  Saviour  less  welcome  be- 
cause He  is  a  perfect  Saviour,  able  to  the  very  uttermost  to 
save  all  who  come  unto  Him  by  faith?  because  in  His  incar- 
nation and  death  He  included  in  the  covenant  not  Himself 
only,  but  all  who  should  believe  on  His  name,  and  on  His 
Father  which  sent  Him  .-*  Therefore  I  do  invite,  I  do  entreat, 
as  many  as  hear  me,  by  the  no  condemnation,  by  the  no  sepa- 
ration, which  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  safe-keeping  of  their 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         55 

souls,  by  the  assurance  of  their  salvation,  by  the  certain  vic- 
tory over  every  sin,  by  the  surceasing  of  all  fear,  and  the 
engendering  of  all  love,  and  by  whatever  other  expectations 
and  assurances  are  cheerful,  stable,  and  glorious,  I  do  invite 
all  to  take  refuge  in  this  ark  of  their  salvation,  where  alone  is 
safety,  that  they  perish  not  in  the  overwhelming  flood  of  the 
wrath  and  indignation  of  God. 

This  freeness,  and  fulness,  and  perfect  assurance  of  the 
purpose  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  which  I  set  forth  as  the 
inducement  and  the  encouragement,  and  the  great  argu- 
ment for  those  weary  and  heavy  laden  with  the  world's 
changes  and  disappointments,  to  lay  hold  upon  Him  and 
be  at  rest,  I  do  present  to  you  who  are  in  Him,  and 
are  this  day  to  shew  forth  your  faith  in  Him,  and  your 
union  with  Him,  as  your  privilege  and  possession.  You 
are  at  present  in  the  wilderness,  and  have  neither  bread, 
nor  water,  nor  any  rest  for  the  sole  of  your  foot,  nor  any 
defence  against  the  enemies  which  hang  about  you  on  all 
sides,  save  this  alone,  your  assured  faith  in  the  new  covenant, 
which  God  confirmeth  with  you  this  day  in  the  blood  of 
His  Son.  These  enemies  look  for  your  faltering  in  this 
faith,  in  order  to  be  upon  you  and  to  destroy  you.  Doubt, 
and  you  are  weak ;  disbelieve,  and  you  perish.  Remember 
ye  the  day  of  provocation  in  the  wilderness,  when  the  fathers 
tempted  and  proved  Him ;  and  because  they  had  tempted  Him 
"  these  ten  times,"  they  did  see  what  they  called  His  breach 
of  promise,  and  were  not  suffered  to  enter  into  the  holy  land, 
but  fell  every  carcass  of  them  in  the  wilderness.  So  fear  ye 
lest  a  promise  being  left  you  of  entering  in,  lest  a  covenant 
having  been  confirmed  with  you,  any  of  you  should  fall  short 
through  unbelief  "  For  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was 
steadfast,  and  every  transgression  and  disobedience  received  a 
just  recompense  of  reward,  how  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect 
so  great  salvation  ?" 

And  for  this  end,  dear  brethren,  have  we  endeavoured  to  lift 
your  thoughts  out  of  the  visible  world  of  manifestation  into 
the  spiritual  world  of  the  Divine  purpose,  that  you  might  be 
delivered  this  day  from  all  resting  upon  these  symbols  which 


56  THE  INCARNA  TION  : 

are  to  be  set  before  you,  but  by  them  ascend  into  the  unseen 
reahties  in  the  heavenly  places.  We  have  taught  you  that 
the  incarnation  of  the  Eternal  Word  hath  for  its  only  begin- 
ning and  origin  the  purpose  of  God  to  make  known  unto 
angels,  and  principalities,  and  men,  the  grace,  and  mercy,  and 
love  which  there  is  in  His  own  eternal  essence ;  which,  to 
brinsf  into  manifestation,  He  must  forego  for  a  while  the  love 
which  He  beareth  to  His  own  Son,  and  His  own  Son  submit 
to  become  flesh,  and  to  tabernacle  upon  earth,  to  do  the  will 
of  His  Father,  and  keep  the  law,  and  make  it  honourable,  and 
render  an  atonement  for  sin,  and  bring  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness.  Whereby  the  eternal  harmony  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  and  the  essential  holiness  of  the  Divinity, 
became  manifest,  to  the  delight  of  all  intelligent  creatures ; 
and  the  grace  and  mercy  of  the  Godhead,  which  yet  had  not 
been  seen,  but  only  His  unrelenting  severity  against  the  re- 
bellious, became  wondrously  set  forth  and  magnified. 

Now,  dearly  beloved  brethren,  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath 
promised  that  He  will  be  a  mouth  unto  His  ministers,  and  we 
besought  the  blessed  Spirit  that  He  would  lead  us  into  all 
truth,  and  enable  us  to  utter  unto  you  that  which  was  season- 
able, we  ought  surely  to  believe  that  these  thoughts,  howevei 
weak  the  utterance,  contain  the  food  on  which  your  souls  are 
this  day  to  feed.  See,  then,  that  ye  meditate  and  inwardly 
digest  them.  And  let  me  now  help  you  to  one  or  two  good 
uses  of  the  same. 

First,  It  is  the  will  and  purpose  of  God  from  all  eternity, 
that  you  who  are  called  into  the  Church  of  Christ  should 
be  saved.  The  Father  hath  given  you  unto  Christ,  and  none 
can  pluck  you  out  of  the  Father's  hands.  Therefore  be  as- 
sured of  your  election  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  of  your  persever- 
ance therein  unto  the  end.  Pray  in  faith,  as  those  who  have 
the  spirit  of  adoption.  Believe  that  "  all  things  are  yours,  whe- 
ther Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  things  present,  or  things  to 
come,  or  life,  or  death  ;  all  are  yours,  for  ye  are  Christ's,  and 
Christ  is  God's."  If  God  could  prove  unfaithful,  you  would 
have  a  reason  to  doubt  Him  ;  if  Christ  could  cast  you  off, 
you  would  have  a  reason  to  distrust  Him ;  if  the  covenant 
depended  on  things  created  and  made,  you  might  tremble  in 


ITS  ORIGIN  IN  THE   WILL  OF  GOD.         57 

the  fall  and  destruction  of  things  created  and  made ;  but  if 
it  be  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  ye  are  chosen 
in  Him ;  then,  though  the  foundation  of  the  world  were  to  be 
removed,  the  purpose  of  God,  that  ye  should  be  holy  and 
without  blame  before  Him  in  love,  is  not  thereby  removed, 
or  shaken,  or  altered,  or  infringed.  Therefore  go  on  your  way 
rejoicing. 

Secondly,  As  Christ  did  not  His  own  will  to  glorify  Him- 
self, but  forewent  the  sovereignty,  the  Divine  and  uncreated 
liberty  thereof,  and  learned  obedience  as  a  servant,  boring  His 
ears,  as  a  willing  slave,  and  delighting  to  be  under  the  law, 
thereby  to  honour  the  will  of  God,  which  is  holy  and  just  and 
good  ;  whereby  He  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  to 
all  who  believe  :  so  we  must  in  like  manner  yield  ourselves  to 
the  holy  will  of  God,  and  glorify  not  our  own  will,  which  is 
under  the  law  of  sin  and  death  ;  but  receiving  the  Holy  Spirit 
into  our  hearts,  to  write  therein  God's  most  gracious  laws,  we 
must  bring  forth  out  of  a  good  conversation  our  works  with 
meekness  of  wisdom,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God, 
For  in  no  other  way  can  we  be  sanctified,  but  by  the  will  of 
God :  "  by  the  which  will  we  are  sanctified."  It  is  thus,  by 
acknowledging  and  bowing  to  the  will  of  God,  that  we  grow 
into  the  image  of  Christ,  and  are  made  partakers  of  the 
heavenly  gift,  and  grow  in  the  increase  and  fruitfulness  there- 
of, even  unto  the  end. 

Thirdly,  The  sufferings  which  in  this  course  of  obedience 
you  have  to  undergo  from  all  quarters,  arising  out  of  ignor- 
ance, error,  evil  inclinations,  worldly  temptations,  satanic  and 
spiritual  influences,  with  all  the  other  fruits  and  consequences 
of  a  disobedient  and  reprobate  will,  are  to  be  undergone  with 
humility  and  patience,  yea,  with  a  remorse  and  repentance  at 
their  presence ;  with  contrition  of  soul  and  broken-hearted- 
ness,  as  being  the  fruits  of  your  rebellious  spirit,  and  the  con- 
tinual memorials  of  what  your  Lord  underwent  for  your  re- 
demption from  them  ;  yea,  there  should  be  a  certain  loathing 
and  abhorrence  of  all  these  as  the  sink  of  abomination  in 
which  you  formerly  wallowed.  You  should  not  fret  or  grow 
weary  and  impatient  before  the  Lord.  That  mood  belongeth 
to  God  by  right,  who  is  the  party  offended ;  not  to  you,  who 


58  THE  INCARNATION,  ETC. 

are  the  offenders.  Brethren,  in  your  righteousness  be  patient, 
be  not  disturbed  from  your  moderation  and  meekness  by  any 
inward  or  outward  trial.  Let  patience  have  her  perfect  work, 
that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  complete,  wanting  nothing.  Be 
willing  to  be  offered ;  in  all  your  agonies,  saying,  "  Not  my 
will,  but  thine  be  done."  Present  your  bodies  a  willing  sacri- 
fice ;  shew  that  it  is  not  an  outward  enforcement  of  the  mem- 
bers, but  an  inward  act  of  the  willing  mind :  and  remember 
what  are  the  signs  of  willingness,  meekness,  patience,  content- 
ment, gladness,  &c.  These  and  many  other  uses  are  to  be 
derived  from  this  great  act  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  from 
the  great  revelation  of  grace  which  hath  this  day  been  set 
before  you,  and  which  we  pray  the  Lord  to  bless  to  His  own 
glory  in  the  Church.     Amen. 


II. 

THE  END  OF  THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  INCARNATION  IS  THE 
GLORY  OF  GOD. 

John  xiii.  31. 
And  God  is  glorijied  in  the  Son  of  man. 

''jpHE  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  which  the  glory  of 
the  Son  of  man  was  procured,  is  the  grandest  mystery 
into  which  angels  or  the  sons  of  men  can  inquire.  If  you 
regard  the  eternity  of  its  purpose  so  constantly  declared  to 
have  been  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  before  the 
world  began,  the  incarnation  stands  before  us  as  one  of  the 
original  projects  (if  I  may  so  speak)  of  the  Creator's  mind,  in 
order  to  the  completion  of  that  mighty  work  of  creation 
which  He  was  about  to  undertake  ;  not  an  expedient  to  meet 
an  accident,  but  an  original  intention,  more  ancient  than 
creation  itself,  and  to  which  the  creation  of  being  and  the 
permission  of  sin  were  but  as  it  were  the  necessary  prepara- 
tions. If  you  regard  the  awful  mystery  of  the  manifestation 
of  this  purpose,  that  the  eternal  Word  of  God,  the  uncreated 
Substance  of  the  eternal  Essence,  did  take  into  consubstantial 
and  eternal  union  with  Himself  the  substance  of  fallen  Adam, 
or  I  may  say  the  very  substance  of  the  fallen  earth,  even  the 
dust  of  the  ground,  to  be  united  with  it  to  redeem  and  glorify 
it,  and  for  ever  and  ever  to  be  manifest  therein  to  all  the  uni- 
verse of  God ;  it  transcendeth  all  utterance,  and  passeth  all 
comprehension,  so  very  great  is  the  mystery  of  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh.  Or,  thirdly,  if  you  regard  the  profound  humilia- 
tion and  most  exquisite  suffering  in  body  and  in  spirit,  which 
that  Man  endured,  in  whom  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head bodily,  while  the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  tabernacled 


6o  THE  INCARNATION: 

amongst  us ;  this  endurance  and  humiliation,  as  we  shall 
endeavour  to  set  forth  in  our  next  discourse,  is  beyond  all 
comprehension.  Or  if,  fourthly,  you  regard  the  exaltation 
far  above  all  principality  and  power,  and  every  name  that  is 
named  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  into  which  the  Son  of  man,  the 
woman's  seed,  the  glorified  dust  of  the  ground,  hath  ascended 
up  on  high,  for  ever  and  for  ever,  to  manifest  in  Himself,  and 
in  His  Church,  in  like  manner  humbled,  and  in  like  manner 
to  be  glorified,  the  manifold  riches  of  the  grace  and  glory  of 
God :  I  say,  in  whatever  respect  you  consider  the  work  of  the 
incarnation,  in  its  purpose,  in  its  manifestation,  or  in  its  com- 
pletion, it  is,  without  all  controversy,  the  mighty  power  and 
work  of  God  ;  undertaken  and  undergone  for  far  higher  ends 
than  are  commonly  discoursed  of;  for  far  higher  ends  than 
the  redemption  of  the  elect  Church,  who,  I  may  say,  are  but 
the  lively  stones  with  which  God  buildeth  up  the  work  ;  but 
the  work  itself  is  no  less  than  the  manifestation  of  His 
own  glory,  and  the  eternal  blessedness  of  all  His  obedient 
and  dutiful  creatures.  Wherefore  our  Lord,  contemplat- 
ing in  the  text,  and  in  various  other  passages  of  Scripture, 
the  great  crisis  and  turning-point  of  this  mighty  work, 
His  death,  burial,  and  descent  into  hell,  by  which  the  low- 
est depth  was  sounded,  and  the  foundation  of  the  eternal 
glory  laid  upon  the  unremovable  rock  beneath  the  waters  of 
sin,  which  are  to  be  baled  out ;  He  ever  speaketh  of  it  as  if 
it  had  been  the  commencement  of  His  Father's  glory,  saying, 
"  Now  is  my  Father  glorified ;"  "  I  have  glorified  thee  upon 
the  earth  ;"  "  Father,  glorify  thy  name ;"  and  other  such  ex- 
pressions, which  surely  signify  to  us  that  the  glory  of  the 
eternal  Godhead  was  in  some  remarkable  way  to  receive  in- 
crease and  enlargement  from  the  work,  in  the  accomplishment 
of  which  Christ  was  travailing.  It  is  of  this  subject, — the 
glory  accruing  unto  the  Father,  or  invisible  God,  from  the 
work  of  the  incarnation  and  death  of  Christ,  that  we  are  now 
to  discourse,  and  for  which,  dear  brethren,  we  have  sought  to 
prepare  ourselves  with  much  meditation,  converse,  and  prayer 
these  several  weeks;  and  we  do  now  publicly  ask  your 
prayers,  that  in  times  of  such  spiritual  famine,  the  Lord  would 
be  pleased,  for  your  sakes,  and  for  the  sake  of  His  Church, 


ITS  END   THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  6i 

to  give  us  good  store  of  wholesome  and  nourishing  food,  to 
the  enlargement,  enlivening,  and  edification  of  our  souls,  in 
the  common  faith. 

To  this  great  subject  of  the  glory  which  was  brought  unto 
the  invisible  God  from  the  incarnation  of  the  Eternal  Word, 
we  would  make  our  way  by  reverently  inquiring  from  the 
Scriptures,  in  order  to  find  in  how  far,  and  in  what  manner, 
the  Holy  Spirit  connecteth  these  two  things,  the  incarnation 
and  the  glory  of  God,  with  one  another.  And  we  begin  with 
the  song  which  the  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  sung  over 
the  birth  of  the  Child  in  Bethlehem  :  "  Glory  to  God  in  the 
highest,  peace  on  earth,  good  will  to  the  children  of  men." 
This  song  of  the  nativity,  which  is  after  the  nature  of  a  pro- 
phecy, embraceth  the  consequences  of  that  birth  under  three 
heads,  of  which  the  first  and  noblest  is,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the 
highest ;"  that  is,  not  in  the  highest  degree  merely,  but  in  the 
highest  places  and  regions  of  being ; — in  the  highest  places, 
as  distinguished  from  the  inferior  earth,  upon  which  is  pro- 
nounced the  benediction  of  peace ;  and  in  the  highest  regions 
of  being,  as  distinguished  from  the  children  of  men,  unto 
whom  the  rich  inheritance  of  God's  good  pleasure  is  be- 
queathed. But  into  the  regions  of  hell  or  of  the  pit,  where 
the  fallen  and  reprobate  spirits  have  their  place,  this  pro- 
phecy of  the  nativity  entereth  not  ;  because  they  had  no 
right  nor  inheritance  of  hope  therein,  but  on  the  other  hand, 
an  inheritance  of  fearful  expectation  and  fiery  judgment. 
This  word,  "highest"  is  commonly  used  of  God, — "He  shall 
be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest ;"  and  in  ascriptions  of  praise 
to  God, — "  Hosanna  in  the  highest ;"  and  in  the  passage 
before  us  it  doth  certainly  denote  that  in  the  supereminent 
dignities  of  being,  in  the  utmost  elevations  of  created  intelli- 
gence, and  in  the  chief  manifestations  of  God's  power  and 
strength,  there  was  to  come  a  glory,  an  exceeding  great  glory, 
from  the  birth  of  the  Son  of  the  virgin.  And  that  great 
gathering  of  the  heavenly  host  to  look  upon  the  scene,  their 
earnest  zeal  to  celebrate  the  act  with  ascriptions  of  praise, 
doth  manifest  that  they  were  interested  in  no  ordinary  degree 
in  that  which  then  began  to  be  accomplished  upon  the 
earth.       And    moreover,    because   it   is   revealed    that   the 


62  THE  INCARNATION: 

angels  desire  to  look  into  the  mystery  of  the  incarnation, 
as  it  unfoldeth  its  first-fruits  in  the  redemption  of  the 
Church  ;  and  that  they  are  diligently  employed  in  ministering 
unto  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ;  and  that  when  God 
shall  the  second  time  bring  the  Only-begotten  into  the  world, 
He  shall  say,  "Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him:"  and 
above  all,  because  it  is  one  constituent  part  of  the  mystery 
of  godliness,  that  "  God  was  seen  of  angels,"  we  conclude  that 
the  relation  of  all  the  heavenly  intelligences  towards  the  God- 
head is  in  some  way  dependent  upon,  and  hath  in  some  way 
been  greatly  affected  by,  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  ; 
that  there  hath  been  opened  to  them  something  of  which 
they  stood  in  eager  expectation,  and  some  glory  of  the  in- 
visible Godhead  discovered,  whereby  their  blessedness  hath 
been  greatly  enhanced  ;  a  new  defence  cast  around  the  habi- 
tations of  their  being,  and  a  new  spirit  inspired  into  their 
services,  on  account  of  which  they  sing  first  in  order  and  in 
dignity,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest." 

But  a  still  higher  view  of  this  subject  will  present  itself,  f 
we  take  into  consideration  another  passage  of  this  same  evan- 
gelist, where  it  is  recorded  in  the  19th  chapter,  that  as  He 
descended  the  Mount  of  Olives,  to  enter  Jerusalem,  the  whole 
multitude  of  His  disciples  began  to  rejoice  and  to  praise 
God  for  all  the  mighty  works  which  they  had  seen  ;  saying, 
"  Blessed  be  the  King  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord ; 
peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest."  Here  is  con- 
nected with  the  coming  of  Christ  our  King,  not  only  peace 
on  earth,  but  peace  in  heaven  ;  of  which,  I  think,  the  best 
interpretation  is  to  be  found  in  the  12th  chapter  of  the  Apo- 
calypse ;  where  it  is  revealed  that,  after  the  Man-child  which 
is  to  rule  the  earth  with  a  rod  of  iron  had  been  caught  up  to 
God  and  His  throne,  there  was  war  in  heaven,  Avhich  resulted 
in  Satan's  being  cast  unto  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast 
out  with  him  :  wherefore  they  sung,  "  Rejoice,  ye  heavens, 
and  they  that  dwell  in  them  ;  for  the  accuser  of  the  brethren 
is  cast  down,  which  accused  them  before  our  God  day  and 
night."  This  suggesteth  to  us  a  still  higher  sense  of  the 
words  of  Paul,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  commented 
upon  in  the  preceding  sermon,  where  it  is  written  of  the  per- 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  63 

son  and  office  of  Christ :  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him 
should  all  fulness  dwell ;  and  having  made  peace  through 
the  blood  of  his  cross,  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto 
himself;  whether  they  be  things  in  earth  or  things  in  heaven." 
From  these  and  many  other  passages,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
reconciliation  and  peace  which  flow  from  our  Lord's  incarna- 
tion have  a  wider,  a  much  wider  application  than  to  the  earth 
only;  and  in  some  way,  which  we  are  hereafter  to  inquire 
into,  do  affect  the  heavens  also  and  the  dwellers  therein  ; 
though  certainly  they  affect  not  the  angels  which  kept  not 
their  first  estate,  nor  the  reprobate  spirits  of  men,  as  the  Uni- 
versalists  dream,  whose  doctrine  I  abhor  and  detest,  and  shall 
ever  labour  to  expose.  But,  besides  this  peace  in  heaven, 
there  is  added  in  the  passage  now  under  consideration,  "  Glory 
in  the  highest :"  "  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest." 
Whence  we  gather  that  "  the  highest"  is  a  region  above  the 
heavens,  the  dwelling-place  and  abode  of  I  know  not  what 
order  of  beings  ;  if  indeed  it  be  the  dwelling-place  of  any 
created  order,  and  not  the  immediate  habitation  of  the  Divi- 
nity ;  of  whom,  though  it  be  true  that  He  is  everywhere  pre- 
sent, yet  it  is  also  true  that  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  He  is 
revealed  to  possess  one  place  by  peculiar  property,  and  to 
fill  it  with  most  glorious  effulgency.  "  Thus  saith  the  High 
and  Lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose  name  is  Holy, 
I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  place  ;"  where  the  word  in  the 
Hebrew  is  the  same  which  is  usually  rendered  in  the  Greek 
by  the  word  which  we  translate  "  highest."  The  same  truth, 
of  a  peculiar  abode  of  the  glory  of  God,  is  gathered  from  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  where  it  is  said,  "  When  he  had  by 
himself  purged  our  sins,  he  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high."  And  in  Timothy  it  is  said,  "  That  God 
dwelleth  in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto ; 
whom  no  man  hath  seen,  neither  can  see."  Besides,  through- 
out all  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  appellative 
which  God  is  most  frequently  known  by  is  this  very  word, 
"  the  Highest."  From  which  premises  I  am  very  much  in- 
clined to  conclude,  that  this  glory  in  the  highest,  which  is 
added  to  peace  in  heaven,  hath  no  lower  reference  than  to 
the  Divinity  Himself,  whose  essential  and  everlasting  glory 


64  THE  INCARNATION: 

was  to  be  illustrated  and  manifested  in  some  marvellous 
manner,  by  the  incarnation  of  His  only-begotten  Son.  Let 
us  for  the  present  rest  in  this  information,  without  opening 
the  manner  how,  until  we  have  obtained  more  light  from  the 
examination  of  other  scriptures. 

It  is  not  likely  that  the  heavenly  host  would  have  ascribed 
such  a  marvellous  property  to  the  birth  of  Messiah,  as  that  it 
should  glorify  God  in  the  highest,  and  still  less  likely  is  it 
that  His  disciples  should  do  so,  unless  the  same  had  been  re- 
vealed and  written  of  Messiah  in  the  holy  prophets,  to  which 
therefore  I  Avould  go  back  and  search  for  the  light  which  they 
afford  us  upon  this  great  subject.  And  I  begin  with  a  pas- 
sage in  the  49th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  where  it  is  thus  written  : 
"  The  Lord  hath  called  me  from  the  womb  ;  from  the  bowels 
of  my  mother  hath  he  made  mention  of  my  name.  And  he 
hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  sword  ;  in  the  shadow  of 
his  hand  hath  he  hid  me,  and  made  me  a  polished  shaft ;  in 
his  quiver  hath  he  hid  me  ;  and  said  unto  me.  Thou  art  my 
servant,  O  Israel,  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified."  That  He 
speaketh  here  of  Messiah,  the  true  Israel,  or  Prince  of  God, 
and  not  of  the  literal  Israel,  or  Jacob,  is  manifest,  not  only 
from  the  grandeur  of  the  expressions,  but  also  from  the  words 
which  follow,  wherein  Messiah  complaineth  of  His  ineffectual 
mission  to  His  brethren.  "  Then  I  said,  I  have  laboured  in 
vain,  I  have  spent  my  strength  for  nought  and  in  vain  ;  yet 
surely  my  judgment  is  with  the  Lord,  and  my  work  with  my 
God."  To  this  sorrowful  complaint  His  Father  thus  maketh 
answer,  assuring  Him  of  the  certainty  that  all  which  was 
covenanted  for  should,  in  due  time,  be  fulfilled:  "And  now, 
saith  the  Lord  that  formed  me  from  the  womb  to  be  his  ser- 
vant, to  bring  Jacob  again  to  him.  Though  Israel  be  not 
gathered,  yet  shall  I  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and 
my  God  shall  be  my  strength  ;"  and  so  on  through  the  whole 
of  the  chapter,  which  is  a  dialogue  between  Messiah  and  the 
Father  concerning  the  fruitlessness  of  His  first  mission,  which 
was  past,  and  the  fruitfulness  of  His  second  mission,  which  was 
to  come.  From  this  word  of  the  Holy  Spirit  we  learn  two 
things :  first,  that  in  this  Child  called  from  the  womb  the  glory  of 
God  was,  in  some  mysterious  way,  wrapped  up ;  and  that  the 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  65 

heavenly  host  were  only  speaking  the  language  of  Divine 
prophecy  when  they  sung  over  His  birth,  "  Glory  to  God  in 
the  highest."  "  Thou  art  my  servant,  O  Israel,  in  whom  I 
will  be  glorified."  We  may  see  also  why,  in  this  passage, 
He  hath  given  to  Him  the  name  of  Israel,  or  Prince  of  God, 
as  being  spoken  to  Him  upon  His  ascension  and  sitting  down 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  when  He  was  appointed  both  Christ 
and  Lord.  Jacob,  being  left  alone  of  all  his  kindred,  wrestled 
with  the  Lord  until  the  breaking  of  the  day,  and  was  not  pre- 
vailed against,  wherefore  he  was  called  no  more  Jacob  but 
Israel ;  "for  as  a  prince  hast  thou  power  Avith  God  and  with  men, 
and  hast  prevailed."  Even  so  Jesus,  being  left  alone,  wrestled, 
I  may  say,  with  God,  from  the  time  that  He  said  upon  the 
cross,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me.?" 
during  all  the  night  of  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness,  until 
the  breaking  of  the  morning  of  His  resurrection  ;  or  it  may 
be  through  all  the  night  of  the  rejection  of  Jacob,  until  the 
morning  of  their  restoration  and  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  ; 
after  Vhich  He  is  properly  entitled  to  the  name  of  Israel,  which 
God  accordingly  bestowcth  upon  Him  in  this  dialogue  which 
is  holden  upon  His  ascension,  in  pledge  of  His  reintroduction 
into  the  world,  with  power  and  great  glory  :  "  Thou  art  my 
servant,  O  Israel,  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified." — We  learn, 
secondly,  from  this  passage  concerning  the  glory  of  God, 
which  came  from  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  that  though  in  the 
investiture  it  was  given  Him  at  His  ascent  into  glory,  in  its 
manifestation  it  is  reserved  for  a  period  still  future  :  because 
upon  His  ascension,  and  during  His  intercession,  He  is  repre- 
sented as  cdmplaining  that  the  glorious  object  of  His  commis- 
sion had  been  frustrated  ;  and  in  consolation  is  assured  that, 
in  the  mean  time,  He  shall  be  given  as  a  light  unto  the  Gen- 
tiles ;  and  after  describing  the  honour  which  thence  should 
come  unto  His  name,  the  prophet  proceedeth  :  "  Sing,  O 
heaven  ;  and  be  joyful,  O  earth  ;  and  break  forth  into  singing, 
O  mountains :  for  the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  people,  and 
will  have  mercy  upon  his  afflicted."  After  which  cometh  the 
glory  of  the  people  Israel,  which  the  aged  Simeon  also  knew 
was  to  be  preceded  by  the  light  of  the  Gentiles.  The  short 
space  allowed  for  the  measure  of  a  discourse  in  these  niggard 
VOL.  V.  E 


66  THE  INCARNATION : 

times,  doth  not  suffer  me  to  confirm  this   from  the  other 
prophets. 

And  now  I  proceed  to  the  Gospels,  to  examine  what  more 
guidance  they  will  give  us  to  the  full  and  right  apprehension 
of  this  subject,  the  glory  of  God  procured  by  the  incarnation 
of  His  Son.  In  the  narrative  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus, 
recorded  in  the  nth  chapter  of  Luke,  we  find  our  Lord 
thus  answering  the  message  of  his  sickness :  "  This  sickness 
is  not  unto  death,  but  for  the  glory  of  God,  that  the  Son 
of  God  might  be  glorified  thereby."  And  being  come  to 
the  place  of  the  sepulchre,  He  further  saith,  "Said  I  not 
unto  thee,  that  if  thou  wouldest  believe,  thou  shouldest  see 
the  glory  of  God  ?"  This  glory  of  God,  therefore,  for 
which  Lazarus's  sickness  and  death  were  ordained,  consist- 
eth  in  something  which  Martha  should  see  if  she  believed ; 
that  is,  it  consisted  in  the  mighty  work  of  raising  Lazarus 
from  the  dead.  And  that  other  miracles  were  manifesta- 
tions of  the  same  glory  is  further  evident  from  that  which 
the  Lord  answered  of  the  blind  man  :  "  Neither  hath  this 
man  sinned,  nor  his  parents ;  but  that  the  works  of  God 
should  be  made  manifest  in  him."  So  also  He  is  said  "  to 
have  manifested  forth  His  glory"  in  the  marriage  supper  of 
Cana,  when  He  changed  the  water  into  wine.  We  may  con- 
clude, therefore,  in  general,  that  the  glory  of  God  was  shewn 
forth  in  the  mighty  acts  of  Christ,  which  He  did  during  the 
days  of  His  flesh ;  because,  as  I  have  oft  explained  to  you, 
they  were  but  the  foreshewings  and  forerunners  and  first- 
fruits  of  that  glorious  power  which  He  is  to  exercise  over  the 
whole  world  in  the  time  of  His  kingdom.  This  in  general  of 
all  His  works ;  but  I  cannot  here  pass  an  observation  upon 
these  three  works  in  particular,  of  which,  and  of  no  others,  is 
this  manner  of  expression  used.  Our  observation  is,  that 
they  are  every  one  of  them  emblematical  and  prophetical ; 
the  marriage  supper  of  Cana,  typical  of  the  marriage  supper 
of  the  Lamb  with  His  Church,  when  this  dispensation  of 
water  shall  be  changed  into  the  dispensation  of  wine.  For 
this  present  is  as  much  the  dispensation  of  water,  signified  in 
baptism,  its  initiatory  sacrament,  as  the  former  was  the  dis- 
pensation of  flesh   and  blood,  signified  in  circumcision,  its 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  67 

initiatory  sacrament,  and  its  other  fleshly  ordinances.  Yet  as 
the  former  dispensation,  though  of  blood,  had  in  it  the  rudi- 
ments of  the  present  dispensation  in  its  divers  washings,  so 
hath  this  dispensation,  though  of  water,  present  in  the  cup 
the  rudiments  of  that  richer  and  more  joyful  dispensation. 
Whence  wc  say  over  the  cup,  in  the  holy  supper,  "  This  is 
the  new  covenant  in  my  blood,"  of  which  new  covenant  we 
have  only  the  earnest  in  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  And  this  is 
the  reason,  as  I  judge,  why  it  is  said  particularly  of  that 
miracle  that  He  manifested  forth  His  glory,  because  it  was  a 
discovering  of  that  glory  which  should  be  manifested  when 
He  shall  drink  wine  new  with  His  disciples  in  His  kingdom. 
Concerning  the  second  of  these  works,  which  is  that  of  the 
man  born  blind,  who  witnessed  such  a  good  confession  before 
the  Sanhedrim  of  the  nation,  I  consider  it  as  an  emblem  of 
the  future  conversion  of  the  Jewish  Church,  upon  whose 
dark  eye  the  Lord  did  first  cast  another  film  as  of  clay  and 
spittle,  so  that  they  are  now  doubly  blinded  :  first,  the  natu- 
ral blindness  of  the  heart ;  and  secondly,  the  blindness  which 
came  from  their  rejection  of  Christ.  But  they  shall  at  length 
wash  in  the  pool  of  Siloam,  which  is  the  emblem  of  the 
Spirit  that  is  to  be  poured  out  upon  the  house  of  Israel  and 
Judah;  and  they  shall  then  see:  and  now  shall  they  be  called 
upon  to  stand  a  fiery  ordeal  and  proof,  like  that  of  the  blind 
man,  and,  like  him,  be  rejected,  and  suffer  many  things  for 
His  sake,  whom  they  heretofore  pierced,  and  now  do  mourn 
over  with  a  great  lamentation.  And  having  suffered  excom- 
munication from  the  synagogue  of  those  who  still  adhere  to 
Moses,  they  shall  then  see  the  Lord,  to  whose  veiled  divinity 
they  were  blind  at  their  former  meeting ;  and  now  He  shall 
reveal  Himself  to  them  at  once,  without  disguise,  as  the  Son 
of  God,  and  they  shall  fall  down  and  worship  Him.  In  this 
sense  it  is  that  I  judge  "  the  works  of  God  were  manifested  " 
in  this  man  born  blind.  And  so  judge  I  also  of  Lazarus,  who 
was  raised  from  the  dead ;  and  of  his  two  sisters,  Mary  and 
Martha ;  that  they  represent  the  glorious  resurrection  of  the 
saints,  by  which  the  two  sister  churches  of  the  Gentiles  and  the 
Jews  shall  be  made  glad,  at  a  time  when  they  are  brought  under 
the  deepest  waters  of  sorrow;  the  one  the  heart-broken  sorrow 


68  THE  INCARNATION: 

of  her  that  will  not  be  comforted,  but  steals  forth  to  weep 
alone  and  in  silence — which  is  the  sorrow  that  shall  then  pierce 
the  heart  of  the  Jewish  Church  :  the  other,  the  affliction  and 
grief  of  a  bustling  active  spirit,  such  as  now  pervadeth  the 
Gentile  Church,  who  is  a  perfect  Martha ;  being  "  troubled 
about  many  things,"  and  who  shall,  before  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  be  impeded,  disconcerted,  and  driven  back,  and  in  her 
straits  shall  cry  aloud  for  comfort.  And  both  shall  be  com- 
forted in  the  coming  of  Christ  with  all  His  risen  saints. 

Let  no  one  mock  at  our  making  the  miracles  of  the  Lord 
emblematical,  when  those  done  by  the  hand  of  Moses  were 
remarkably  so.  If  the  miraculous  preservation  by  the  pass- 
over  prefigured  our  salvation  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ ;  and 
the  passing  through  the  Red  Sea,  the  baptism  of  water ;  and 
the  smiting  of  the  rock,  the  flowing  of  the  Spirit  from  Christ's 
smitten  body ;  and  the  manna,  the  spiritual  nourishment  of 
Christ's  body,  exhibited  in  the  holy  supper ;  and  the  change 
of  the  manna  for  the  flesh  of  quails,  which  brought  leanness 
into  the  souls  of  the  people,  figure,  as  I  judge,  the  changing 
of  the  bread  into  flesh  by  the  monstrous  doctrine  of  transub- 
stantiation,  which  brought  on,  and,  more  than  everything  else, 
doth  continue,  the  leanness  of  the  Papists  ;  Avhy  should  we  not 
look  for  the  same  emblematical  signification  in  the  Lord's 
miracles,  especially  in  those  three,  which  are  separated  from 
all  the  rest,  as  having  a  more  immediate  relation  to  that  glory, 
which  is  not  yet  made  manifest,  but  which  was  foreshewn  by 
glimpses  through  these  the  acts  of  His  mighty  power  upon 
the  earth.  But  whether  you  may  go  along  with  us  in  this 
interpretation  or  not,  one  thing  is  manifest  from  these  three 
several  instances,  that  the  glory  which  Christ  brought  to  His 
Father  consisteth  in  the  manifestation  of  things,  in  the  doing 
of  works,  in  mighty  achievements  of  power,  and  manifesta- 
tions of  goodness ;  and  not  in  mere  abstract  revelations  to 
the  mind, — that  is,  not  in  doctrines  or  ideas  merely,  but  in 
acts  and  deeds,  whereof  ideas  are  the  laws,  and  doctrines  the 
prophetic  declarations.  This  I  count  a  very  important  re- 
mark, which  will  help  us  greatly  in  the  sequel. 

For  further  light  upon  this  subject  of  the  glory  which  Christ 
brought  unto  the  Father,  we  must  carefully  examine  another 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  69 

passage  recorded  in  the  12th  chapter  of  this  Gospel:  That 
certain  Greeks,  who  were  come  up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship  at 
the  feast,  being  much  impressed  in  their  .minds  with  the 
miracle  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  came  to  Philip  and  desired 
him,  saying,  "  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus.  Philip  cometh  and 
tellcth  Andrew :  and  again  Andrew  and  Philip  tell  Jesus." 
Thereupon  Jesus  opened  to  these  Greeks  a  strain  of  discours- 
ing exactly  similar  to  that  which  He  held  with  Nicodcmus, 
saying — "  The  time  is  come  that  the  Son  of  man  should  be 
glorified.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Except  a  corn  of 
wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abidcth  alone  :  but  if  it 
die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit.  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall 
lose  it :  and  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world,  shall  keep  it 
unto  life  eternal.  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me ; 
and  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  servant  be :  if  any  man 
serve  me,  him  will  my  Father  honour."  Having  thus  spoken 
to  these  Greeks  in  signification  of  the  cross  they  would  have 
to  bear  if  they  gave  ear  to  that  suggestion  of  the  Spirit  which 
had  brought  them  into  His  presence ;  what  a  self-denial  of 
the  present  life  they  must  be  prepared  for,  and  what  a  reward 
would  abide  them  in  the  resurrection  of  the  just ;  He  is  bur- 
dened and  oppressed  with  the  weight  and  load  of  His  spirit, 
and  thus  uttereth  it  in  the  hearing  of  them  all*:  "  Now  is  my 
soul  troubled  ;  and  what  shall  I  say  }  Father,  save  me  from 
this  hour :  but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour."  He 
rejecteth  this  form  of  petition,  and  will  not  use  it.  Then  He 
chooseth  another,  saying,  "  Father,  glorify  thy  name."  Which 
petition  was  no  sooner  uttered  than,  as  heretofore,  to  confirm 
the  Jews,  so  now  to  confirm  the  Greeks,  "there  came  a  voice 
from  heaven,  I  have  both  glorified  it  and  will  glorify  it  again." 
And  that  the  proper  end  of  such  a  mighty  and  marvellous 
voice  might  not  be  mistaken  by  these  Greeks,  it  is  added, 
"  that  when,  of  the  people  who  stood  by  and  heard  it,  some 
said.  It  thundered  ;  and  others.  An  angel  spake  to  Him,  Jesus 
answered  and  said.  This  voice  came  not  because  of  me,  but 
for  your  sakes ;"  that  is,  to  confirm  your  faith,  and  shew  you 
that  I  am  the  true  Messiah,  the  sent  of  God,  whom  God  thus 
confesseth  in  the  hearing  of  you  all.  And  thus  I  reckon  that 
for  these  Greeks,  (whom,  with  all  the  commentators,  I  judge 


70  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

to  have  been  pious  heathens  who  worshipped  the  one  God, 
and  came  up  to  adore  Him  at  Jerusalem,  in  the  court  of  the 
Gentiles,) — for  these  unproselytised,  uncircumcised,  unbap- 
tized  Greeks  did  the  Lord,  in  the  very  last  act  of  His 
ministry,  obtain  from  heaven  this  most  signal  attestation  of 
His  divinity,  as  He  had  obtained  the  same  for  the  Jews  in 
the  very  first  act  and  beginning  of  His  ministry.  And  now 
for  the  bearing  which  it  hath  upon  the  subject  of  the  glory 
which  He  brought  unto  God :  He  calleth  upon  God  to  glorify 
His  own  name ;  and  is  answered  by  God,  that  He  "  both  had 
glorified  it  and  would  glorify  it  again."  And  first,  what  is 
meant  by  the  petition,  "Father,  glorify  thy  name.-'"  This 
question  will  be  best  answered  by  quoting  a  part  of  His  own 
intercessory  prayer :  "  I  have  manifested  thy  name  unto  the 
men  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the  world  :  thine  they  were, 
and  thou  gavest  them  me ;  and  they  have  kept  thy  word. 
Now  they  have  known  that  all  things  whatsoever  thou  hast 
given  me  are  of  thee.  For  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words 
which  thou  gavest  me :  and  they  have  received  them,  and 
have  known  surely  that  I  came  out  from  thee,  and  they  have 
believed  that  thou  didst  send  me."  From  this  passage  we 
gather  that  Christ  manifested  the  name  of  the  Father  by 
setting  forth  every  word  as  proceeding  from  the  Father's  will, 
and  every  act  as  the  demonstration  of  His  power  :  testifying 
of  Him  always,  and  always  doing  His  will :  wherefore  He  is 
called  "the  true  and  the  faithful  Witness:"  wherefore  also 
He  saith,  "  I  have  a  work  to  work  which  ye  know  not  of;  my 
work  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me."  And  to  the 
same  purpose  He  saith,  in  the  same  intercessory  prayer,  and 
in  immediate  connexion  with  the  above,  "  I  have  glorified  thee 
on  the  earth  ;  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me 
to  do."  Then  follows,  with  only  an  ejaculation  intervening,  "  I 
have  manifested  thy  name."  The  manifesting  the  name  of  God, 
therefore,  I  consider  to  be  the  manifesting  the  essence,  or  power, 
or  nature  of  God,  which  Christ  had  done  by  every  action 
of  His  life :  and  now,  therefore,  at  the  close  of  that  life  He 
prays  His  Father  to  glorify  His  name  :  that  is,  to  sustain  and 
confirm  the  testimony  which  He  had  given,  and  to  make  it 
glorious.     Christ  had  glorified   His   Father's   name   on   the 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  71 

earth ;  but  withal  it  still  lacked  another  more  transcendent 
glory,  which  He  prayeth  for,  and  which  can  in  no  way  be  said 
to  have  commenced  until  His  resurrection.  To  this  prayer 
of  the  Son  of  man  the  Father  maketh  answer,  "  I  have  both 
glorified  it,  and  I  will  glorify  it  again."  To  what  this  former 
glorification  referreth  I  know  not,  except  it  be  to  the  mount 
of  transfiguration,  which  is  continually  referred  to  in  the 
Scriptures  as  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  glory ;  and  on 
which  occasion,  besides  the  voice  which  was  spoken  to  Him 
at  Bethabara,  in  the  hearing  of  the  Jews,  and  now  in  the  hear- 
ing of  these  Greeks,  there  was  given  unto  His  most  confiden- 
tial disciples,  a  complete  emblem  and  type  of  that  glory  which 
shall  be  manifested  when  He  shall  come  again  in  majesty 
and  might.  This  second  glorification  which  is  promised,  was 
entered  to  on  the  day  of  the  ascension,  and  shall  be  revealed 
unto  the  world  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  the  times. 
In  this  passage,  therefore,  we  gain,  as  it  were,  a  response  from 
the  throne  of  the  Eternal  Himself,  declaring  in  what  way  His 
name  was  glorified  in  Christ,  and  in  what  way  it  is  to  be 
glorified  again  ;  namely,  by  the  consummation  of  that  glory 
which  was  typified  upon  Mount  Tabor. 

Your  time  will  not  permit  me  to  follow  out  this  inquiry 
any  further  at  present ;  which  yet  hath  been  sufficient  to  give 
us  more  definite  ideas  concerning  that  glory  of  God  which 
proceedeth  from  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  and  to  teach  us 
where  it  is  to  be  sought, — namely. 

First,  In  the  highest  origin  of  being,  which  is  the  very 
essence  of  the  Godhead  itself,  whereof  I  believe  that  the  most 
glorious  manifestation  will  be  found  to  be  in  the  God-man 
throughout  all  eternity.  This  is  what  Christ  had  in  His  view, 
when  He  said,  "  Now  is  my  Father  glorified  ;"  as  if  the  glory 
which  had  accrued  from  all  the  past,  was  not  worthy  to  be 
compared  with  that  which  was  now  to  come.  In  the  same 
sense  the  prophets  always  saw  first  the  suff"erings  and  then 
the  glory  which  should  follow.  In  the  same  sense  St  Paul 
saith,  "  The  light  afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  work 
out  a  far  more  exceeding  even  an  eternal  weight  of  glory." 
"And  being  justified  by  faith  we  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory 
of  God."     This,  doubtless,  is  the  end  of  the  promise,  and  the 


72  THE  INCARNATION : 

fulfilment  of  the  desires  of  the  saints ;  of  which  nothing  is 
present,  nor  seen  as  yet,  otherwise  it  were  no  longer  hoped 
for.  At  present  we  hold  it  by  faith,  which  is  "  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for  ;  "  and  it  is  called  "  the  riches  of  the  glory 
of  Christ's  inheritance  in  the  saints  ; "  when  the  earth  is  said 
to  be  "  filled  with  the  glory  of  God,  even  as  the  waters  cover 
the  channels  of  the  sea." 

But,  besides  this,  we  have  seen  another  part  of  the  glory, 
which  is  to  be  sought  for  in  the  work  which  Christ  finished 
upon  the  cross :  "  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth,  I  have 
finished  the  work  which  Thou  gavest  me  to  do."  This,  in  its 
first  sense,  is  applicable  to  His  incarnation  merely,  or  the  days 
of  His  flesh ;  but  it  also  virtually  includeth  all  the  previous 
work  of  which  His  life  on  earth  was  the  accomplishment.  For 
the  whole  progression  of  promises  and  signs,  of  types  and 
symbols,  which  had  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  was 
the  work  of  Christ  upon  the  earth.  These  were  the  elements 
out  of  which  His  incarnation  as  it  were  did  grow,  and  His 
incarnation  took  them  up  into  itself  All  the  earthly  forms 
which  Messiah  took  by  the  Spirit  before  His  advent,  mould- 
ing this  thing  and  that  thing  to  shadow  forth  some  part  and 
portion  of  His  power,  or  of  His  sufferings,  do  come  legiti- 
mately into  view,  when  we  consider  the  glory  which  Christ 
brought  unto  God  upon  the  earth.  And  in  this  sense  it  is 
that  any  of  us  who  believe  in  Him  do  glorify  God  in  eating, 
in  drinking,  and  in  whatsoever  we  do  ;  we  do  all  to  the  glory 
of  God,  when  we  do  all  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  seeking  not  our  own 
will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  us.  In  this  sense  we  are 
said  to  glorify  God,  by  our  life  and  by  our  death,  by  our 
afflictions  and  by  our  joys ;  and  this  is  the  glory  of  the  Cross. 
Wherefore,  we  are  said  to  be  "to  the  praise  of  His  glory,  who 
first  trusted  in  Christ."  And  again,  we  are  said  to  be  "  to  the 
praise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace,  wherein  He  hath  made  us 
accepted  in  the  Beloved."  But  this,  whether  regarded  in 
Christ  or  in  His  Church,  is  a  glory  that  needeth  to  be  glori- 
fied,— is,  in  truth,  only  the  shadow  of  the  glory  which  shall  be 
revealed  in  Him,  and  in  us. 

Having  thus  examined  the  subject  of  ''  God  glorified  in 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  73 

Christ,"  and  shewn  from  Scripture  the  two  parts  whereof  it 
consisteth,  we  proceed  in  this  discourse  to  open  the  first,  which 
is  contained  in  these  words,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest," 
from  which  we  would  endeavour  to  set  forth  the  glory  which 
God  himself  hath  derived  from  the  Son  of  man  ;  or,  in  other 
words,  the  glory  which  the  Godhead  hath  derived  from  His 
creature  man,  above  and  beyond  all  other  creatures ;  on  ac- 
count of  which  He  hath  smelt  such  a  sweet  savour  of  man- 
hood as  to  have  taken  the  nature  of  man  into  fellowship  with 
His  own  nature,  and  will  exhibit  His  glorious  divinity  in  the 
visible  substance  of  manhood,  through  the  endless  ages  of 
eternity.  For  this  is  what  is  implied  in  the  words,  "  God  is 
glorified  in  the  Son  of  man  :"  whereof  the  point  is  not,  that 
He  is  glorified  in  the  divinity  of  the  Eternal  Word,  but  in 
the  humanity  of  His  incarnate  Son  ;  in  the  Son  of  man,  not  in 
the  Son  of  God.  We  are  now  reverently  to  inquire  how  this 
cometh  to  pass  :  and  may  the  Lord  help  our  meditations,  and 
give  power  unto  our  discourse  ! 

Observe,  then,  first  of  all,  my  dearly-beloved  brethren,  that 
the  eternal  power  and  Godhead  of  Jehovah  neither  doth  nor 
can  suffer  any  the  least  change  or  alteration,  increase  or 
diminution,  but  is  essentially  one  and  the  same,  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever  ;  as  it  is  written,  "  Every  good  and  every 
perfect  gift  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom 
there  is  no  variableness  nor  shadow  of  turning."  He  is  the 
source  and  the  fountain  of  all  existence,  from  whom  everything 
hath  its  being,  according  to  the  law  of  its  being,  which  by 
Him  is  decreed  and  appointed  so  as  that  it  can  never  pass 
over  or  beyond  it ;  but  whereas  other  fountains  are  fed  from 
their  own  streams,  and  all  other  causes  sustained  and  reacted 
upon  by  their  own  effects,  returning,  as  it  were,  for  ever  into 
the  circle  of  that  law  under  which  they  were  formed  ;  it  is  not 
so  with  the  great  original  Former  and  First  Cause  of  all 
things,  who  receiveth  no  help  nor  nourishment  of  His  strength 
from  any,  or  all,  of  the  things  which  He  hath  created  and  made, 
being  the  self-existent,  all-originating  Will,  which,  within  itself, 
hath  an  all-perfect  comprehension  of  all  things  which  have  been, 
which  are,  and  which  are  yet  to  be.  Wherefore,  in  such  pas- 
sages as  our  text,  wherein  glory  is  said  to  have  accrued  unto 


74  THE  INCARNATION: 

God  from  the  Son  of  man,  it  cannot  be  meant  that  the  eter- 
nal and  unchangeable  Majesty  of  heaven  received  any  right 
or  property  in  anything  which  before  He  had  not  possessed  ; 
but  that  by  the  peril  and  travail  of  that  same  great  enterprise 
of  His  Son  against  the  powers  and  potentates  of  evil,  there 
did  come  forth  into  manifestation,  that  is,  into  the  region  of 
creation  and  of  knowledge,  some  form  of  the  Divine  nature 
and  feature  of  the  Divine  excellency,  some  secret  of  the 
Divine  counsels  and  everlasting  monument  of  the  Divine 
power,  which  heretofore  was  undiscovered  and  undiscover- 
able,  and  to  the  creatures  all  the  same  as  if  it  had  not  been. 
For,  dear  brethren,  if  you  will  but  cut  the  cords  and  rise  a 
little  above  the  artificial  structures  which  we  raise  upon  the 
ground  of  God's  clear  and  unobstructive  word,  you  will  at 
once  perceive  that,  from  the  beginning,  everything  which  hath 
been  done  by  the  Godhead,  in  the  work  of  creation  or  of  pro- 
vidence, or  of  regeneration,  is  but  a  discovering  or  revealing 
of  that  which  was  from  all  eternity  beheld  by  God  in  His 
own  Son,  who  is  the  express  image  of  the  person  of  God,  in 
whom,  as  in  a  glass,  He  contemplateth  all  things,  and  be- 
holdeth  them  as  realities  ere  yet  to  any  creature  they  have  a 
being,  ere  yet  there  was  a  creature  to  whom  they  might  be 
manifested.  This  is  the  mystery  of  the  Son's  eternal  and 
essential  divinity  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  that  in  Him  the 
Father  beholdeth  all  things,  all  purposes,  all  possibilities,  all 
realities,  and  in  Him  enjoys  them  all  with  full  and  perfect 
fruition,  ere  ever  they  are,  and  while  they  are  growing  into 
outward  being ;  yea,  and  into  Him  shall  recapitulate  them 
all  again,  after  they  have  run  through  their  appointed  transi- 
tions. Not  that  the  things  which  are  created  shall  ever  again 
cease  to  be ;  for  they  were  seen  from  eternity  in  the  Son's 
fulness,  and  therefore  must  last  for  ever  :  nor  that  they  shall 
be  only  as  they  were  from  everlasting,  in  the  being  of  the 
Son  ;  but  that  they  shall  hereafter  be  outwardly  existing,  even 
as  He,  the  Head  of  them  all,  shall  be  outwardly  existing  :  they 
shall  stand  fast  for  ever  in  Him,  united  in  Him,  and  by  Him 
preserved  and  protected  from  all  encroachment  and  change ; 
and  by  Him  led  and  directed  in  the  worship  and  obedience 
of  the  Most  High  God.     And  herein  also  consisteth  the  mys- 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  75 

tery  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  by  His  operation  all  things 
which  from  eternity  have  their  reality  in  the  Son  become 
manifested  in  time  and  place,  and  are  sustained  in  their  out- 
ward manifestation ;  yea,  even  the  Son  himself  became  out- 
wardly manifest  in  manhood  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  by  His  power  was  exalted  from  the  grave  to  His  present 
supereminency.  It  is  the  mighty  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
which  is  conducting  all  things  through  the  same  perilous 
voyage  of  outward  and  separate  existence,  to  reconduct  them 
back  again  into  a  condition  of  outward  stability  and  un- 
changing reality,  such  as  by  the  Father  from  all  eternity  they 
were  really  and  substantially  seen  in  the  person  of  His  own 
Son,  in  the  eternal  Word,  and  all-perfect  image  of  Himself. 
The  only  change  or  alteration,  therefore,  consisteth  in  revela- 
tion or  in  manifestation :  there  is  nothing  which  hath  not 
been  eternally  known  to,  and  present  in,  the  Son  ;  even  the 
possibility  of  sin  itself,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  chaotic  basis 
out  of  which  the  manifestation  of  holiness  and  righteousness 
cometh.  These  remarks  I  throw  out  for  the  use  of  those 
who  are  of  a  higher  mood,  and  delight  to  arise  into  the  true 
mystery  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  and  to  understand  the 
higher  and  more  precious  portions  of  the  Word  of  God. 

But  the  same  truth  may  be  rendered  more  simple,  and 
obvious  to  the  meanest  capacity,  in  the  following  way :  If  we 
could  suppose  anything  to  be  added  to  God  which  was  not 
in  Him  nor  pertained  to  Him  from  everlasting,  we  must  sup- 
pose that  before  such  addition  He  was  incomplete,  or  is  now 
more  than  complete.  If  we  could  suppose  anything  to  be 
recovered  which  was  lost,  or  to  be  remembered  which  was 
forgotten,  or  to  be  reassumed  which  was  rejected,  to  be  re- 
formed which  was  amiss,  or  to  be  changed  which  needed 
change,  we  must  suppose  mutation,  or  deviation,  or  disap- 
pointment in  Him  who  is  the  Rock  of  ages  and  refuge  of  all 
distressed  things,  the  stability  and  support  of  all  being,  the 
eternal  and  unchangeable  I  AM,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever,  in  whom  there  is  no  variableness  nor  shadow  of 
turning.  So  that,  when  words  of  this  import  and  significa- 
tion are  applied  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  unto  our  God,  as  that 
He  repenteth,  and  removeth,  and  restoreth,  and  reformeth 


76  THE  INCARNATION : 

that  which  He  hath  already  constituted  and  done,  they  are 
but  significant  of  the  changes  which  the  mutable  universe, 
and  we  a  part  of  it,  are  passing  through  in  this  our  outward 
and  separate  voyage,  until  we  shall  be  safely  brought  back 
and  reconstituted  in  an  unchangeable  -union  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  our  Head.  They  are  the  words  of  human  language, 
proper  to  express  that  imperfect  and  unstable  condition  in 
which  all  things  at  present  are,  and  shall  continue  to  be,  until 
the  days  of  restitution ;  and  being  applied  to  God,  they  ex- 
press not  any  change  in  Him,  but  in  us  who  behold  Him. 
As  we  speak  of  the  risings,  and  the  settings,  and  the  revolu- 
tions of  the  sun,  though  he  abideth  steadfast  in  the  heavens,  or 
hath  but  a  motion  which  to  the  eye  is  imperceptible  ;  as  we 
speak  of  his  being  clouded  and  obscured  and  eclipsed,  though 
he  shineth  with  a  constant  brightness ;  and  as  we  speak  of 
the  irregularities  of  the  heavenly  motions,  and  the  unsettled- 
ness  of  all  sublunary  things,  though  it  be  certain  they  do  all 
obey  a  constant  and  invariable  law,  which  neither  is  nor  can 
be  changed,  save  by  the  good  will  and  pleasure  of  God ; — 
speaking  in  all  these  instances  in  accommodation  to  the  ap- 
pearances which  offer  themselves  to  the  sense,  and  against 
the  realities  which  we  discover  by  the  reason :  so  speaketh 
God  in  Holy  Scripture  concerning  Himself,  accommodating 
His  word  to  that  language  which  is  necessary  to  man's  present 
condition,  and  presenting  Himself  as  full  of  repentance  towards 
him  that  repenteth,  pure  to  the  pure,  and  froward  to  the  froward, 
and  upright  to  the  upright ;  yet  is  it  most  certain  that  within, 
and  under,  this  popular  form  of  speech,  there  is  also  in  His  word 
a  deeper  revelation  concerning  the  oneness  and  unchangeable- 
ness  of  His  being,  concerning  the  harmony  of  all  His  opera- 
tions, and  the  great  end  of  all  His  works  ;  into  which  revela- 
tion of  His  steadfast  and  constant  being  He  is  ever  seeking  to 
draw  men  out  of  the  changes  and  fluctuations  in  which  He 
findeth  them,  and  to  which  He  doth  assimilate  and  accommo- 
date Himself,  in  the  first  instance,  by  the  only  language  which 
they  are  able  to  understand.  As  any  discreet  man  who  would 
teach  astronomy  to  unlettered  and  ignorant  people  must  begin 
from  the  appearances  of  the  heavens,  and  employ  a  language 
conformed  thereto,  until  he  shall  have  ascended  with  his  dis- 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  77 

ciples  into  the  great  principles  of  things ;  of  the  heaven's 
rest,  and  the  earth's  rotation  ;  of  the  sun's  central  place,  and 
the  earth's  revolution,  and  the  regular  motions  of  all  the 
planets  ;  after  which,  he  employeth  another  language  derived 
from  the  facts,  and  not  from  the  ^appearances  :  so  the  teacher 
of  Divine  truth  must  proceed,  as  indeed  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  declaration  of  Divine  truth  hath  proceeded,  beginning  by 
the  use  of  the  popular  language  of  God's  repentance  and 
changeableness  towards  us  as  we  change  towards  Him,  which 
is  the  Arminianism  of  Divine  truth,  mistaken  by  all  the 
Methodists  and  the  great  body  of  our  Evangelicals  for  the 
whole  of  it ;  but  truly  it  is  only  the  popular  accommodation 
thereof,  in  order  to  lead  the  people  into  the  true  principles  of 
God's  unchangeableness,  and  the  eternal  sacrifice  of  His  Son, 
of  the  eternal  constitution  of  the  Church  and  election  of  all 
saints  in  Him,  of  their  perseverance,  their  assurance,  and  cer- 
tain glory,  with  all  other  the  higher  truths  of  the  mystery  of 
godliness,  which  are  THE  TRUTH,  and  alone  entitled  to  the 
name  of  THE  truth  ;  discarded  though  they  be  at  pre- 
sent as  high  Calvinism,  and  even  decried  as  soul-destroying 
Antinomianism  ;  yea,  and  all  the  subsidiary  and  subordinate 
language  of  entreaty  and  promise  and  condition,  is  only 
adopted  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  our  waywardness  to 
the  knowledge  of  His  counsels,  which  are  one  in  their  purpose 
and  regular  in  their  progression,  all  leading  to  the  one  glori- 
ous end  of  manifesting  unto  His  creatures  the  wonders  of 
His  eternal  being,  and  securing  them  in  the  blessedness  of 
the  same.  This  manifestation  of  Himself  is  the  one  end  of 
creation,  and  of  redemption,  and  of  restitution  ;  and  I  may 
also  add,  it  is  the  one  end  of  the  permission  of  sin  in  the 
world,  of  an  apostasy  in  the  Church,  and  of  reprobation 
through  eternity, — I  say  the  chief  and  only  end  of  all  is  the 
declaration  of  the  essential  glory  of  the  Godhead. 

Bearing  these  observations  in  mind,  let  us  now  proceed  in 
the  exposition  of  our  doctrine,  that  by  the  incarnation  glory 
was  brought  unto  God  in  the  highest,  and  shew  how  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Divine  glory  did  then,  as  it  were,  lift  itself 
above  the  horizon,  and  begin  to  disperse  the  clouds  and 
shadows  of  the  night.     From  all  that  we  know  concerning 


'j2>  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

creation,  it  appeareth,  that  before  the  human  race  was  brought 
into  being,  sin  had  been  permitted  to  enter,  that  through  it 
the  glory  of  the  grace  of  God  might  more  abundantly  appear; 
for  there  are  "  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate ;"  and 
there  are  "  elect  angels  "  mentioned  in  the  Scripture  ;  whereby 
the  glory  of  God's  creation  was  in  a  manner  marred,  His 
majesty  insulted,  and  the  bounds  of  His  dominions  sorely 
troubled  and  infested.  And  hitherto  there  was  no  mention 
of  a  remedy;  and,  I  take  it,  there  was  no  possibility  of  a 
remedy  according  to  the  angelic  constitution  of  being,  which 
being  once  fallen  is  for  ever  fallen.  This  is  a  mystery  which 
I  pretend  not  to  fathom  ;  but  the  fact  is  not  the  less  certain 
that  there  is  no  redemption  for  the  apostate  angels.  I  am 
not  called  at  present  to  enter  into  this,  but  would  just  observe 
in  passing,  that  man  was  created  a  living  soul,  but  the  angels 
were  created  spirits  ;  "  who  maketh  his  angels  spirits ;"  and 
hence  it  may  arise,  that  they  are  not  capable  of  any  re- 
demption ;  for  it  is  continually  said,  that  the  sin  against  the 
Holy  Spirit  can  never  be  forgiven.  Now  it  would  seem  to 
me,  that  a  pure  spirit  in  sinning,  must  sin  against  the  law  of 
its  being,  which,  in  the  case  of  the  angels,  being  the  law  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  is  unpardonable.  But  however  this  may  be, 
it  is  most  certainly  revealed  that  sin  had  been  manifested,  and 
no  deliverance  from  it  had  yet  been  manifested  ;  no  grace,  no 
mercy,  no  holiness,  no  glory,  arising  from  the  victory  over 
and  subjection  of  sin.  It  had  broken  in  like  a  mighty  tem- 
pest, and  swept  away  a  whole  host  of  the  subjects  of  our 
King  :  nay  more,  it  had  power  to  awaken  insurrection  in  their 
own  breasts,  and  in  obedience  to  their  own  will  to  carry  them 
away.  The  region  of  pure  and  mighty  spirits,  therefore,  had 
become  darkened ;  God's  glory  in  that  work  of  creation  ob- 
scured ;  and  the  enemy  had  obtained  an  active  head,  and  a 
permitted  power.  And  I  may  say  that  this  former  manifesta- 
tion of  God's  being  had  become  ambiguous  and  equivocal  in 
the  sight  of  the  creatures :  for  what  may  hinder  another  re- 
bellion, and  another .''  Those  indeed  who  fell  are  restrained 
in  chains  of  darkness,  and  may  deter  by  their  example ;  but 
there  is  no  security  as  yet  against  the  breeding  of  the  same 
spiritual  pestilence :  so  that,  I  may  say,  the  higher  creatures 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  79 

lay  continually  open  and  exposed,  unless  some  hope,  promise, 
or  assurance  were  given  them  of  a  time  when,  and  of  a  means 
whereby,  the  activity  of  sin  was  to  be  destroyed,  and  their  own 
security  secured  :  which  assurance,  though  it  be  not  expressly 
revealed,  yet  have  I  no  doubt,  from  the  whole  bearing  of 
revelation,  the  Lord  had  given  them  ;  and  that  before  man  was 
created  it  was  known  in  heaven,  that  through  this  creature 
man,  the  great  mystery  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  the  great 
destruction  of  sin,  were  to  be  made  manifest :  yea,  that  it  was 
not  only  known  for  the  comfort  and  consolation  of  the  elect 
angels,  but  also  known  among  the  apostasy  for  their  terror ; 
seeing  it  is  written,  they  "  believe  and  tremble."  Nay  more, 
I  have  ofttimes  conjectured,  yea,  and  almost  believed,  that  the 
apostasy  and  rebellion  of  the  angels  in  heaven  arose  against 
the  knowledge  and  revelation  made  unto  them  of  God's  eter- 
nal purpose  to  manifest  His  fulness  in  another  type  of  being 
than  their  own :  for  it  is  continually  written,  that  by  Christ 
and  for  Christ  all  things  were  created  ;  that  is,  for  His  posses- 
sion as  the  Christ, — not  as  the  Word,  but  as  the  Christ,  or  the 
God-man,  which  He  was  from  all  eternity,  being  "slain  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world."  The  promulgation  of  this  de- 
cree in  heaven,  I  conjecture,  yea  I  believe,  was  the  cause  of 
the  first  apostasy.  It  was  an  apostasy  against  the  Christ, 
against  the  truth,  that  the  Divine  fulness  should  become 
visible  in  another  form  of  being  than  their  own  :  otherwise 
why,  as  the  Christ,  should  He  judge  the  angels,  if  against  Him 
as  the  Christ  they  had  not,  in  some  way  or  other,  rebelled ; 
or  why  should  they  have  the  same  portion  with  the  apostasy 
amongst  men  in  the  lake  that  burneth,  if  they  had  not  sinned 
as  men  have  sinned :  they,  against  the  spiritual  revelation 
of  the  Christ  proper  to  them  ;  we  against  the  verbal  and 
fleshly  and  ecclesiastical  manifestation  of  Him  .-*  And  to 
the  same  effect,  I  believe,  that  the  elect  angels  stood  and 
do  still  stand  in  the  Christ,  by  having  received  the  de- 
cree when  it  was  promulgated  in  heaven  before  the  day 
of  our  creation,  and  having  stood  fast  in  their  allegiance ; 
so  that  we  may  say  that  the  most  ancient  form  of  being 
was  the  Man-God,  the  Eternal  Son,  generated  from  all  eter- 
nity, though  not  the  first  manifested  in  being,  but  that  for 


8o  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

which  all  prior  manifestations  did  but  prepare  the  way  ;  and 
that  in  Him  all  good  things  consist,  or  stand  fast  together, 
and  that  from  Him  all  evil  things  apostatise,  and  against 
Him  rebel :  wherefore  in  the  end  all  the  elect  shall  be 
gathered  together  in  Him,  and  all  the  apostasy  shall  be  cast 
into  that  passive  and  ineffectual  condition  of  misery,  called 
the  second  death,  in  the  hell  which  He  hath  founded  for 
them.  Now,  brethren,  think  not  that  this  is  a  speculation ;  it 
is  the  orthodox  doctrine  of  our  fathers,  who,  in  treating  of  the 
Church,  or  in  writing  out  their  faith  concerning  the  Church, 
made  it  to  consist  of  elect  angels  and  elect  men,  chosen  to- 
gether in  Christ ;  and  it  is  the  doctrine  taught  in  our  Church- 
standards  and  by  St  Paul  in  his  epistles.  With  the  more 
confidence,  therefore,  let  us  proceed. 

The  apostasy  of  the  angels  was  permitted  by  God,  or,  to 
speak  more  correctly,  the  law  of  the  angelic  being  was  so 
constituted  by  God  as  that  it  could  apostatise,  only  in  pre- 
paration for  the  bringing  in  of  the  Christ,  that  perfect  and 
all-comprehending  form  of  being.  And  for  this  end  the 
creature  man  was  constituted,  under  a  new  law  and  condition 
of  being,  such  that,  if  he  should  fall  by  the  inroad  of  sin,  he 
might  rise  again  by  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  which  was, 
as  I  said  above,  by  his  being  created  a  living  soul.  For 
though  man  was  created  in  the  image  of  God,  he  was  not  so 
in  the  same  sense  in  which  Christ  is  called  "  the  brightness 
of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person." 
For  the  two  Adams  are  drawn  into  contrast  by  the  apostle  in 
the  15th  chapter  of  First  Corinthians,  in  this  manner:  "It  is 
sown  a  natural  body,  (or  a  body  proper  to  a  soul,)  it  is  raised 
a  spiritual  body,  (or  a  body  proper  to  a  spirit :)  there  is  a 
natural  (soulish)  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body.  And 
so  it  is  written.  The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul, 
the  second  Adam  a  life-giving  Spirit.  Howbeit,  that  was  not 
first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  of  the  soul:  and 
afterward  that  which  is  spiritual.  The  first  man  is  of  the 
earth,  earthy :  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  As 
is  the  earthy,  such  are  they  also  that  are  earthy :  and  as  is 
the  heavenly,  such  are  they  also  that  are  heavenly.  And  as 
we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy,  so  we  shall  also  bear 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  8i 

the  image  of  the  heavenly."  In  this  passage  we  are  taught 
that  Adam  was  not  a  spiritual  creature  in  the  sense  in  which 
we  are  spiritual,  who  are  born  again  of  the  Spirit  by  the 
quickening  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  nor  was  he  a 
creature  in  the  dignity  into  which  we  are  adopted  by  faith, 
and  unto  which  we  shall  be  admitted  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's 
manifestation.  Whatever  distinction  there  is  between  a  soul 
and  a  spirit, — and  such  a  distinction  is  continually  preserved  in 
Scripture, — that  same  distinction  there  is  between  the  genera- 
tion of  Adam  and  the  regeneration  of  Christ:  and  this  dis- 
tinction is  declared  in  the  passage  to  be  equal  to  that  which 
there  is  between  the  body  which  is  sown  in  the  grave,  and 
the  body  which  is  raised  at  the  resurrection.  For  the  further 
illustration  of  this  point  is  to  be  diligently  observed  what 
Paul  declareth  in  the  2d  chapter  of  the  same  epistle,  that  the 
natural  man,  or  the  man  of  the  soul,  which  Adam  in  his 
first  creation  was  constituted,  "  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him  ;  neither 
can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned." 
From  this  we  learn  that  there  is  in  that  form  of  being  called 
the  soul,  after  which  Adam  was  created,  a  natural  incapacity 
for  receiving  or  knowing  the  things  which  the  Spirit  teacheth, 
which  are  the  same  things  which  Christ  revealeth ;  and  that 
this  is  a  form  of  being  preparatory  for  a  higher  and  more 
perfect  one,  which  God  might  perhaps  have  given  to  our  first 
parents  if  they  had  stood  faithful  unto  Him  who  created 
them.  They  were  perfect  in  that  kind  in  which  they  were 
created ;  according  as  it  is  written,  "  This  only  have  I  found, 
that  God  made  man  upright;"  but  that  kind  was  not  of  the 
perfectest,  which  yet  awaited  them,  and  to  which  they  per- 
haps would  have  been  translated  if  they  had  not  fallen.  And 
this  doth  exactly  agree  with  what  is  written  by  the  apostle 
Paul  in  another  place,  where,  in  sketching  the  same  parallel 
between  the  first  and  the  second  Adam,  he  calleth  the  former 
a  type  of  the  latter :  "which  is  the  type  of  Him  that  was  to 
come,"  (Rom.  v.  14.)  And  certainly  Adam,  in  his  creation, 
was  the  fullest  type  of  Christ,  being  without  sin,  and  invested 
with  the  sovereignty  of  the  creatures ;  being  planted  in  a 
paradise,  and  having  a  wife  taken  out  of  his  bleeding  side, 
VOL.  V.  F 


82  THE  INCARNATION: 

who  might  be  to  him  for  a  help,  and  the  mother  of  many- 
children,  having  also  to  contend  with  the  serpent.  But  he 
was  no  more  than  the  type, — the  prophet,  priest,  and  king  of 
the  garden  of  Eden,  typifying  the  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King 
of  the  whole  creation  of  God  :  and  while  he  stood  in  this  con- 
dition he  was  not  capable  of  receiving  that  knowledge  of  God 
unto  which  we  have  been  brought  by  the  manifestation  of 
Jesus  Christ.  He  was  the  perfection,  and  as  it  were  the 
fountain-head  of  all  that  knowledge  which,  without  revela- 
tion, the  soul  of  man  is  capable  of:  as  the  knowledge  of 
nature  and  of  natural  life,  the  knowledge  of  his  own  being, 
and  the  knowledge  of  all  the  beings  over  whom  he  was  con- 
stituted king  ;  all  natural  sciences,  when  perfected,  being  but 
the  fragments  of  Adam's  intuition  ;  but  into  the  knowledge 
of  God  he  could  only  go  so  far  as  to  acknowledge  Him  for 
his  Creator,  and  the  Creator  of  the  things  which  were  around 
him.  Of  God's  spiritual  being  I  am  in  great  doubt  whether 
he  could  have  any  distinct  apprehension  or  knowledge ; 
because  Paul  expressly  saith,  that  the  natural  man,  or  the 
man  of  the  soul,  of  which  Adam  was  the  perfect  form, 
knoweth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God:  he  could  not 
know  the  Father,  who  is  known  only  by  the  Son,  who  was 
not  yet  come  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father ;  and  not 
knowing  the  Son  he  could  not  know  the  Spirit,  whose  pro- 
cession succeedeth  that  of  the  Son.  More  than  the  know- 
ledge of  a  Creator  he  could  not  have.  His  being  was  only, 
if  I  may  so  speak,  preparatory  to  a  spiritual  being :  where- 
fore the  Lord  God  presented  Himself  to  him  in  some  reve- 
lation proper  to  that  state ;  walking,  as  it  is  said,  in  the 
garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day;  with  some  attributes  kin- 
dred to  Adam's  nature,  which  delighted  in  the  garden,  and 
loved  the  cool  time  of  the  day.  In  like  manner,  Satan 
the  tempter  presented  himself  with  like  accommodation, 
not  as  a  bright  and  powerful  spirit,  whirling  him  away  whi- 
ther he  would,  and  making  the  round  world  reveal  before 
him  all  its  attractions,  but  as  a  serpent,  one  of  the  subject 
creatures ;  and  he  beguiled  him  with  the  prospect  of  being 
preferred  to  become  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil ;  whereby 
we  perceive  that  Adam,  in  this  former  state  of  his  being,  was 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  83 

inferior  to  the  angels,  whom  I  understand  here  by  the  word 
"gods:"  whereas  the  heirs  of  salvation  enjoy  the  same  as 
their  ministers  and  servants.  From  all  which  I  conclude, 
that  even  his  knowledge  of  God  as  a  Creator  was  very  in- 
ferior to  that  which  we  now  have  by  the  revelation  of  Christ 
Jesus.  But  into  this  subject  I  only  open  a  door  of  thought, 
without  entering,  lest  I  should  be  diverted  from  my  great 
subject  of  God  glorified  in  the  Son  of  man,  having  said  enough 
for  our  present  purpose  of  shewing  that  man  in  his  original 
creation  was  not  the  glory  of  God,  but  only  the  type  of  "  the 
Son  of  man,"  who  was  prepared  in  the  counsels  of  eternity  to 
manifest  that  glory ;  and  that  his  creation  was  but  a  step 
towards  the  introduction  of  the  God-man  into  the  visible 
universe.  In  which  inferior  form  of  manhood  I  believe  him 
to  have  been  created,  that  when  he  should  fall  he  might  not 
utterly  fall,  but  in  falling  rise  through  deep  distress,  and,  by 
omnipotent  grace,  into  that  most  excellent  form  of  being 
whereof  paradise  saw  but  the  goodly  bud. 

Nevertheless,  to  this  new  creature,  the  expectation  of  the 
elect,  and  the  envy  of  the  apostate  angels,  was  directed  ;  the 
former  resting  assured  that  in  it  the  great  desire  of  the  heavens, 
and  the  latter  being  assured,  or  at  least  dreading,  that  in  it 
the  great  terror  of  hell,  was  to  be  revealed.  And  Satan,  the 
prince  of  darkness,  and  the  ruler  of  the  powers  of  darkness, 
having  set  himself  to  destroy  this  creature,  did  so  far  forth 
succeed  in  destroying  him  as  was  necessary  for  his  own  de- 
struction :  he  accomplished  the  breach  which  he  sought  to 
accomplish  ;  but  he  little  imagined  that  through  that  breach 
the  Eternal  Light  against  which  he  warred  was  to  stream  into 
the  visible  world,  and  revive  the  hearts  of  the  elect,  against 
whom  he  wageth  perpetual  war.  He  thought  that  if  this 
creature  should  fall,  as  he  himself  had  fallen,  the  fall  would  be 
irretrievable,  and  the  Word  of  God,  against  which  he  warred, 
falsified  for  ever  ; — insufficient  knowledge  ever  outwitting  it- 
self, inefficient  light  of  falsehood  always  extinguished  by  the 
omnipotent  light  of  truth.  This  fall  of  man  being  accom- 
plished, the  expectation  of  heaven,  though  not  defeated,  was 
again  projected  forward  :  and  the  song  of  joy  which  they 
sung  over  the  creation  was  turned  into  sorrow  and  sadness, 


84  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

when  they  saw  the  earth  also  possessed  by  Satan,  and  man- 
kind bereaved  of  the  image  of  God.  But  their  hope  and 
faith  was  not  utterly  defeated,  any  more  than  was  that  of 
man.  For  a  new  revelation  of  the  promise  was  given,  and 
that,  I  doubt  not,  more  distinct  than  any  hint  or  intimation  of 
it  which  had  been  given  before.  Yet  were  they  all  again  sus- 
pended upon  hope  ;  and  the  Word  of  God  seemed,  to  the 
eyes  of  the  beholders,  again  contraverted,  and  His  purpose 
again  contravened  :  and  sin  to  have  gained  another  advantage 
over  holiness  ;  another  veil  to  be  drawn  over  the  sanctuary, 
and  thicker  clouds  to  envelope  the  dwelling-place  of  God. 

And  now,  thenceforward,  all  heaven  and  earth  looked  for- 
ward for  the  Man,  by  eminency  called  The  Son  OF  Man  ;  that 
is,  the  child  for  whom  manhood  was  created,  and  through  whom 
the  great  secret  was  to  be  revealed,  and  the  Divine  nature  for 
ever  manifested  in  an  outward  form; — which  was,  as  it  were, 
the  great  deliverance  for  which  the  womb  of  all  creation  had 
longed,  and  made  an  empty  and  abortive  effort  to  produce  it 
at  the  birth  of  Adam,  when  things  were  not  yet  ripe  for  the 
great  discovery.  To  see  God,  and  to  be  able  to  name  His 
name,  had  been  the  two  great  desires  of  heaven  and  earth,  and, 
I  may  say,  must  ever  be  the  great  desire  of  every  creature. 
Adam  did  but  hear  His  voice  as  He  walked  in  the  garden;  and 
whenever  any  apparition  or  manifestation  of  Him  was  given 
to  the  patriarchs  or  to  the  prophets,  they  expected  that  they 
should  instantly  die,  because,  as  they  thought,  they  had  seen 
God,  whom  no  man  can  see  and  live.  The  cherubim  are 
represented  as  veiling  their  faces  from  the  greatness  of  His 
glory ;  and  the  light  in  which  He  dwelleth  is  said  to  be  un- 
approachable, and  clouds  and  darkness  to  be  around  Him. 
Hence  also  the  exclusive  honour  of  Moses  above  all  men, 
was  to  speak  face  to  face  with  God  ;  which  could  yet  be  no 
more  than  the  beholding  of  the  manifestation  of  the  glorified 
humanity  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  symbolised  in  the  Shechinah 
above  the  mercy  seat ;  and  this,  we  think,  was  granted  unto 
the  man  Moses,  in  order  that,  by  this  solitary  exception, 
while  the  mysteriousness  of  the  thing  was  nowise  weakened, 
the  desire  of  attaining  unto  it  might  be  rendered  more  in- 
tense, and  the  expectation  of  one  day  possessing  it  might  be 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  85 

encouraged.  No  doubt,  also,  herein  consisteth  the  Lord's 
abomination  of  all  idolatry,  that  by  presenting  a  feigned 
likeness  of  Himself,  decked  out  with  the  lustrous  glory  of 
gold  and  precious  stones,  it  doth  attempt  to  open  the  great 
secret,  and  so  far  forth  to  destroy  that  one  great  glory  of  the 
human  race,  which  is  its  distinction  above  all  races  of  being, 
and  the  palladium  of  its  safety,  that  in  it,  and  through  it,  the 
great  mystery  of  all  creation,  and  desire  of  all  creatures,  is  to 
have  its  accomplishment,  by  the  manifestation  of  God-man  in 
all  His  fulness  and  glory.  And  whereas  the  name  or  power 
of  God  is  equivalent  to  His  nature  or  being,  while  this  lay 
hid  the  former  also  lay  hid,  and  was  considered  to  be  an  in- 
scrutable secret ;  and  a  most  daring  profanation  to  this  day 
is  it  held  by  the  Jews  to  name  the  great  name  of  God.  And 
with  us  Christians  also,  who  possess  the  name.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  there  is  yet  a  mystery  drawn  over  this  wonder- 
ful name,  which  will  not  be  declared  till  the  day  of  the  second 
advent ;  of  which  mystery  the  opening  ought  to  be  a  greater 
object  of  desire  than  it  now  is,  for  the  Lord  expressly  pro- 
miseth  it  to  the  faithful  as  a  special  reward  :  "  I  will  give 
him  my  new  name."  But  how  can  anything  connected  with 
the  second  advent  be  desired,  when  the  very  advent  itself 
hath  ceased  to  be  desired  in  this  all-but-apostate  Church  } 
But  though  that  body  of  men,  now  misnamed  "  church,"  and 
better  named  of  themselves,  "  religious  world,"  hath  ceased  to 
look  forward  either  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Godhead  in  a 
visible  form,  or  to  the  revelation  of  His  full  name,  it  hath 
ever,  as  I  said,  been  the  desire  of  elect  angels  and  elect  men, 
and  the  horror  of  reprobate  angels  and  reprobate  men  : 
but  these  "  Laodiceans  are  neither  cold  nor  hot;  I  would 
they  were  either  cold  or  hot."  And  why  hath  it  ever  been  the 
desire  of  the  innumerable  company  of  angels  and  the  general 
assembly  of  the  first-born,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven? 
Because  it  was  the  purpose  and  decree  of  God,  promulgated 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  gradually  growing  into 
manifestation  by  slow  degrees  and  manifold  pangs  of  crea- 
tion, according  to  the  importance,  the  infinite  and  all-compre- 
hending importance,  of  the  issues  which  rested  on  it.  For, 
brethren,  it  was,  as  I  have  said,  the  nucleus  of  the  whole 


86  THE  INCARNATION: 

scheme,  the  great  end  and  first  beginning  of  all :  and  that 
which  went  before  was  but  the  germination  of  the  seed 
before  it  appears  above  the  earth,  or  the  preparing  of  the  soil 
for  the  casting  of  the  seed  into  the  earth.  And  so  God,  and 
angels,  and  men,  and  devils,  and  whatever  else  existeth,  all 
looked  forward  to  the  Man  in  whose  outward  form  the  God- 
head was  to  become  eternally  manifest.  For  that  in  man  it 
was  to  be  manifest,  God  himself  had  purposed  from  all  eter- 
nity;  and  the  angels,  no  doubt,  had  heard  the  rumour  of  it ; 
wherefore  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  the  angels  of 
God  shouted  over  His  birth :  and  Satan,  with  his  apostasy, 
had  also  heard  a  rumour  of  it,  wherefore  he  solicited  Him  with 
his  wiles  to  forsake  His  allegiance  :  and  the  knowledge  was 
kept  alive,  amongst  the  sons  of  men,  by  every  revelation 
made  to  the  patriarchs  and  the  prophets ;  until  at  length  in 
Bethlehem,  in  the  stable  of  Bethlehem, — fit  emblem  of  the 
world  into  which  He  was  born, — the  child  of  infinite  hopes 
and  longings  was  brought  into  being:  whereupon,  instantly 
the  heavenly  host  waked  all  their  choral  symphonies,  and 
sang,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest ;  peace  on  earth,  and 
good  will  to  the  children  of  men." 

I  consider,  therefore,  brethren,  that  the  glory  which  then 
brake  through  the  clouds  that  surround  the  dwelling-place  of 
God,  is  no  less  a  glory  than  the  manifestation  of  His  whole 
being  and  attributes,  which  had  been  rather  revealed  in  hints 
that  it  was  about  to  be  revealed  than  in  any  positive  revela- 
tion. The  creation  lived  in  hope,  and,  I  may  say,  is  yet 
living  in  hope,  till  the  hidden  majesty  of  Christ  shall  be  led 
forth  most  gloriously,  from  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  in 
heaven.  But  when  Christ  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  the  hope 
of  the  elect  angels  in  heaven  and  the  saints  on  earth  had  its 
visible  object:  the  end  of  the  great  scheme  became  manifest, 
the  subject  of  the  great  decree  was  revealed.  They  could 
look  upon  and  behold  what  they  had  long  desired  to  look 
upon  and  behold  :  they  knew  that  in  this  second  Adam  the 
great  question  was  again  to  be  brought  to  issue ;  and  if  He 
stand,  that  the  great  strife  will  be  at  an  end,  the  great  ques- 
tion resolved,  and  the  great  mystery  opened.  And  the 
second  Adam  was  put  upon  His  probation  as  a  man,  having, 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  87 

as  St  Paul  saith,  emptied  Himself  of  His  divinity ;  in  whom 
the  divinity  had  of  its  own  accord  suspended  itself,  and  by  its 
own  power  kept  itself  continually  suspended.  He  was  man 
and  God  in  one  person ;  and  during  His  humility  the  God- 
head was  employed  in  humbling  or  restraining  itself, — which, 
I  may  say,  is  the  highest  act  of  a  self-existent  being  to  sus- 
pend His  own  activity,  as  it  is  also  the  highest  act  of  grace. 
And  thus  as  being  man  He  went  through  the  trial,  out  of 
which  if  He  shall  come  unconquered  then  is  the  mystery 
accomplished,  and  the  Godhead  shall  be  for  ever  manifested 
in  an  outward  visible  condition.  Therefore  the  Lord  said 
upon  the  eve  of  His  last  trial,  in  the  beginning  of  His  last 
discourse,  "  Now  is  my  Father  glorified." 

And  thus,  brethren,  you  can  perceive,  agreeably  to  the 
idea  witJ\  which  we  opened  this  head  of  discourse,  that  this 
glory,  wb'ch  the  Son  of  man  brought  unto  His  Father,  con- 
sisteth  in  no  less  than  the  manifestation  of  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  todily,  which  great  manifestation  to  distinguish 
into  parts  i:  difficult,  but  yet  for  the  greater  clearness  I  do 
it  thus  : — 

First,  The  nanifestation  of  the  Divine  substance  in  three 
persons,  or  disinct  subsistencies.  As  to  the  unity  of  God, 
there  never  hah  been  any  doubt  in  the  Church,  and  out  of 
the  Church  then  never  hath  been  any  agreement ;  for  though 
the  Unitarians  aid  Deists  pretend  to  worship  one  God,  it  is 
not  the  one'  God  vhoni  we  worship,  but  a  certain  idea  of  per- 
fect being  and  infnite  power  which  they  have  from  their  own 
brain,  an  abstracticn  of  certain  properties  of  man,  a  generalisa- 
tion of  certain  prin  iples  of  matter,  "  a  great  first  cause  least 
understood,"  an  all-irevailing  power,  and  everything  or  any- 
thing but  the  true,  elf-existing,  personal  God.  Alas !  alas ! 
for  their  miserable  d^kness  and  prostitution  of  holy  truth,  to 
call  these  conception,  our  living  and  true  God  !  But  in  the 
Church,  I  say,  whethe  of  the  angels  or  of  men,  there  never 
was  a  doubt  concernim  the  unity  of  God  ;  while  there  was  no 
clear  knowledge  of  a  rinity  of  persons  in  the  Divine  sub- 
stance. It  was  not  unti  the  Son  came  into  manifestation  as 
a  man,  until  the  Word  Aas  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us, 
became  our  Saviour,  the  ong-expected  Messiah  on  earth,  the 


88  THE  INCARNATION: 

long-looked-for  Christ  and  Lord  in  heaven,  for  whom  all 
things  were  created,  that  the  truth  of  the  glorious  Trinity- 
became  a  grand  and  manifest  truth  for  ever.  Because  so 
soon  as  the  Son  became  manifest  He  made  known  the  Father, 
to  whom  He  always  referred  back  as  the  eternal  Father  of 
the  Son,  and  in  Him  the  great  originator  of  all  things,  and 
principal  party  to  the  eternal  purpose  which  the  Son  came 
forth  to  reveal.  "  No  man  hath  seen  the  Father  at  any  time ; 
the  only-begotten  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father 
he  hath  revealed  him."  By  the  same  act  also  did  the  Spirit 
become  manifest ;  for,  as  was  said  at  the  beginning  of  this 
discourse,  Christ's  becoming  outward  and  visible  was  the  act 
of  the  Spirit,  He  was  conceived  by  the  power  of  the  Holy- 
Ghost,  He  grew  in  wisdom  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  walked  by  the  same  inspiration  of  the  Holy  ^host,  in 
the  favour  of  God  and  man,  a  man  under  the  laWj^y'et  com- 
plete before  the  law,  and  blameless ;  and  when  )Ie  passed 
through  baptism,  to  become  the  first-begotten  o*^  the  adop- 
tion, and  the  foundation-stone  of  the  spiritual  Church,  He 
was  endowed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  with  baptisnal  gifts  and 
graces,  as  He  had  been  endowed  before  with'  circumcision 
gifts  and  graces ;  and  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  He 
went  about  doing  all  manner  of  miracles,  andA^y  the  mighty 
working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  raised  from/the  dead  to  sit 
on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,Avhen,  becoming 
Lord  and  Christ,  He  shed  down  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the 
Church,  which  is  His  temple  unto  this  /ay.  So  that  in 
Christ  all  the  glories  of  the  Trinity  wee  first  manifested, 
with  all  their  various  offices,  of  which  I^annot  now  speak 
particularly. 

Secondly,  The  holiness  of  God  was  i/stified,  and,  I  may 
say,  for  the  first  time  manifested,  in  he/ven  and  in  earth  by 
the  Son  of  man.  I  say,  for  the  first  ti^e ;  because  into  both 
parts  of  creation,  celestial  and  terrestriji,  sin  had  entered,  and 
out  of  neither  seemeth  it  to  have  beei/ cleansed  ;  for  even  in 
heaven,  among  the  sons  of  God,  Sain  had  a  certain  right 
and  prerogative,  which  more  than  o/ce  we  find  him  exercis- 
ing. And  certainly  on  the  earth  Ae  holiness  of  God  had 
never  been  manifested  or  known  :  pr  though  a  church  had 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  89 

been  separated  by  special  promises  and  privileges,  and  out- 
ward rites  and  sacraments,  yet  ever  and  aye  did  Satan  steal 
in  and  seduce,  and  at  length  bring  into  open  apostasy,  by  far 
the  more  numerous  and  ostensible  part  thereof ;  and  holiness 
there  was  not  anywhere,  or  at  anytime  since  the  fall,  separate 
or  unmixed  holiness,  until  the  Son  of  God  did  come.  And 
forasmuch  as  the  holiness  of  the  Creator  must  stand  in  sus- 
pense until  there  be  some  form  or  type  of  His  handiwork 
which  exhibiteth  the  same,  and  neither  angels  nor  men  were 
that  form  or  type  of  being,  (for  both  had  fallen,)  I  do  say 
that  the  holiness  of  God,  which  was  both  known  and  believed, 
was  never  yet  demonstrated  until  that  new  type  or  form  of 
being,  the  second  Adam,  the  God-man,  was  revealed  :  in  whose 
triumphant  life  over  sin,  and  whose  triumphant  resurrection 
from  death  and  the  graye,  in  whose  triumphant  defeat  of  Satan 
and  all  his  host,  the  glory  of  God's  holiness  was  manifestly 
shewn  unto  angels  and  the  sons  of  men,  and  an  assurance  given 
that  the  time  was  at  hand  when  it  should  be  established  tri- 
umphant over  all  who  had  ever  gainsaid  it.  Now,  brethren, 
this  holiness  of  God  is  His  true  glory,  as  the  white  light  is  the 
true  glory  of  the  sun.  The  holiness  of  God  is  the  unbroken 
beam  of  His  glory,  whereof  mercy  and  justice,  and  sovereignty 
and  goodness,  are  but,  as  it  were,  the  refracted  or  broken  parts  ; 
and  as  the  green  and  the  violet,  and  the  orange  and  the  red, 
and  the  other  colours  into  which  the  rays  of  the  sun  are  re- 
fracted in  the  rainbow,  when  mixed  in  their  just  proportions, 
do  reproduce  the  colourless  white  :  so  reckon  I  that  the  glory 
of  His  goodness  and  mercy,  and  justice  and  sovereignty,  con- 
cerning which,  in  the  first  instance,  it  is  necessary  to  discourse 
unto  fallen  sinners,  do  as  the  soul  clears  from  the  mist  and 
clouds,  pass  into  one  pure  unbroken  radiance  of  His  holiness  : 
so  that  when  I  say  the  holiness  of  God  was  first  manifested 
in  the  Christ,  it  is  all  the  same  as  to  say,  that  the  glory  of 
His  mercy,  and  of  His  justice,  and  of  His  goodness,  and  all 
His  attributes,  were  then  first  displayed.  For  if  there  were 
no  unbroken  light  of  holiness,  how  could  there  be  any  varieties 
of  that  light  > 

Thirdly,  The  glory  of  God's  almighty  power  was  first  mani- 
fested in  Christ.     For  till  He  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  God's 


go  THE  INCARNATION: 

power  stood  in  suspense,  yea,  and  will  never  be  fully  cleared 
until  hell  shall  receive  its  possessors,  or,  I  should  rather  say, 
its  sufferers.  For  truly  the  tide  of  sin  was  never  turned,  until 
the  Lord  did  come  and  stem  and  roll  it  back.  There  was  no 
knowing  whether  the  darkness  or  the  light  should  prevail, 
until  the  true  Light  appeared,  which  the  darkness  compre- 
hended not.  Then  indeed  the  true  nature  of  sin  was  disco- 
vered to  be  only  a  condition  to  holiness,  not  a  thing  in  itself, 
but  the  state  of  a  thing  in  its  progress  to  perfection.  We 
were  sinners  only  that  we  might  be  sinners  saved  ;  we  had 
fallen  only  that  we  might  rise  higher  from  our  fall ;  and 
this  is  true  of  all  men  when  as  yet  they  were  in  their 
first  head,  that  is,  Adam.  Adam's  fall  was  permitted  and 
ordained,  only  that  Adam  might  be  exalted  from  the  con- 
dition of  a  living  soul  into  the  condition  of  a  quickened 
spirit  And  so  of  each  one  of  us  who  fell  in  him,  Ave  have 
been  brought  into  an  outward  condition  out  of  Adam,  and 
stand  in  our  present  peril  only  that  we  may  be  brought 
back  again  and  recapitulated  into  Christ.  By  which  great 
evolution  of  all  things  from  the  idea  in  the  Son,  back  again 
into  the  outward  reality  in  the  Son,  the  glorious  and  mighty 
power  of  God  had  been  displayed,  and  the  evanescent,  tran- 
sient power  of  sin  and  its  weakness  have  been  manifested, 
yea,  its  subserviency  and  profitableness,  and  I  may  say  even 
necessity,  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Almighty  power  of  God, 
in  redeeming  all  things  from  the  lowest,  basest  condition,  into 
the  most  elevated,  and  dignified,  and  mighty.  For  the  Christ 
is  raised  above  every  dignity,  power,  and  authority  which  is 
named  in  the  universe  of  God :  and  so  shall  every  member  of 
Christ  be  for  ever  raised.  Whence  is  made  the  most  stu- 
pendous manifestation  and  monument  of  the  eternal  power  of 
the  Godhead.  And  in  these  three  things  the  manifestation  of 
the  constitution  of  the  Godhead,  of  the  holiness  of  the  Godhead 
in  the  government  of  the  creation,  and  of  the  power  of  the 
Godhead  in  overcoming  sin,  I  conceive  the  glory  brought  unto 
the  Father  by  the  Son  of  man  doth  chiefly  consist.  This  was 
the  glory  in  the  Highest,  which  the  angels  sung  over  His  birth. 
This  was  the  glory  of  God  which  moved  the  Father  to  yield 
Him  up,  which  moved  the  Son  to  offer  Himself,  which  moved 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  91 

the  Holy  Spirit  to  realise  and  substantiate  His  outward  and 
visible  existence.  And  here  we  conclude  our  first  head  of 
discourse,  concerning  the  glory  which  accrues  from  the  simple 
act,  or  rather  from  the  design  and  purpose  and  nature  of  the 
incarnation.  And  now  we  come  to  consider  more  closely  the 
work  itself,  and  the  glory  with  which  He  glorified  God  by 
His  work  upon  the  earth.  "  I  have  glorified  thy  name  upon 
the  earth  :  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to 
do."  What  was  this  work  which  was  given  Him  to  do  }  what 
was  the  glory  which  He  brought  by  His  life  unto  His  holy 
Father  ?     This  belongeth  to  the  second  part  of  our  discourse. 


PART  II. 

The  work  which  the  Son  of  man  had  to  do  npon  the  earth, 
for  the  glory  of  God,  which  is  the  second  head  of  method, 
was  no  less  than  to  realise  the  eternal  purpose  of  God,  to 
bring  Himself  into  manifestation.  Now,  in  considering  wherein 
consisteth  the  glory  brought  unto  God  hereby,  it  hath  pre- 
sented itself  to  my  mind  under  these  three  particulars  : — 

First,  He  brought  into  existence  the  complete  and  perfect 
form  of  being  which  is  the  God-man,  and  for  which  all  other 
beings,  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  were  but  the  prepara- 
tion, and  in  which  they  must  stand  as  the  head  through  all 
eternity  ;  and   therein   He  shewed  forth  the  glory  of  God, 
in  putting  the  headstone  upon  that  fabric   of  creation,    of 
which,  heretofore.  He  had  created  the  several  parts.     If  His 
creation  of  the  creatures  was  glorious,  how  much  more  glori- 
ous His  own  creation  as  the   Man  ("  made  of  a  woman,") 
the  God-man,  the    Sovereign  of  them  all!      As  the   crea- 
tion of  man,  on  the  sixth  day,  was  more  glorious  than  the 
creation  of  all  the  inferior  animals,  whose  being  is  all  a  mys- 
tery, opening  into,  and  resolved  in,  the  being  of  man ;  so  the 
creation  of  the  Christ,  that  is,  the  incarnation  of  the  eternal 
Word,  was  more  glorious  than  the  creation  of  angels,  and  of 
men,  and  of  all  other  creatures,  whose  being  was  all  a  mys- 
tery and  a  confusion  until  a  Head  was  brought  in  to  be  over 
them  all.     This  is  the  first  particular  in  which  the  Son  of 


92  THE  INCARNATION: 

man  brought  glory  to  God.  The  second  is,  by  His  opening 
the  decree  of  election,  and  explaining  how  the  elect  angels  of 
God  had  stood,  when  the  rest  fell,  and  how  the  election 
according  to  grace,  amongst  men,  had  been  retrieved :  and 
publishing  to  sinful  men  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God, 
which  Cometh  out  of,  and  floweth  from,  the  fountain  of  the 
decree  of  electing  love.  This  is  the  aspect  of  His  mission,  so 
continually  spoken  of  in  the  Psalms :  "  I  will  declare  the 
decree  ;  I  will  preach  righteousness  in  the  great  congregation. 
When  I  shall  receive  the  congregation  I  will  judge  right- 
eously;" that  is.  He  would  publish  and  declare  the  true 
standing  of  every  creature  who  doth  stand  in  the  favour  of 
God.  And  thus  did  He  open  the  glory  of  God,  which  had 
lain  hidden  in  the  eternal  and  inscrutable  decree  ;  and  made 
it  the  basis  of  all  preaching  unto  this  day.  Thirdly,  He 
wrestled  with  the  enemies  of  God,  and  overthrew  them  ;  and 
shewed  the  glory  of  His  power  and  holiness  in  their  weak- 
ness and  discomfiture ;  and  so  set  on  foot  the  redemption  of 
the  bodies  of  the  saints  from  the  grave,  and  of  their  souls 
from  the  place  of  separate  spirits;  and  of  the  creatures  of 
God  from  darkness  and  sin ;  which  redemption  He  .shall 
accomplish  in  the  fulness  of  time ;  but,  in  as  far  as  the  right 
and  title  is  concerned.  He  completed  it  at  His  resurrection 
from  the  dead.  These  three  particulars  I  shall  now  give  all 
diligence  to  open  ;  and  I  pray  you  to  give  all  patient  heed 
to  the  word  which,  for  your  sakes,  the  Lord  may  put  into  my 
mouth.  And  be  not  weary,  I  pray  you,  of  the  message  of 
God,  but  take  heed  how  ye  hear. 

I.  Though  there  was  a  creation  of  angels,  and  likewise  of 
men,  before  the  bringing  in  of  the  Christ,  or  the  revealing  of 
the  Man-God,  it  is  constantly  set  forth  in  Holy  Scripture  that, 
to  manifest  Him,  and  in  Him  to  manifest  Himself,  was  the 
first  beginning  and  great  end  of  all  the  creation  of  God,  for 
which  all  that  went  before  was  but  the  necessary  preparation. 
For  as  the  great  idea  of  a  master-builder  discovereth  not 
itself  in  the  first  stone  which  is  laid,  nor  in  the  first  scafibld- 
ing  which  is  reared  up,  but  in  the  progress,  and  often  towards 
the  completion  of  the  work :  so  the  system  of  the  universal 
Architect,  in  creating  being,  though,  from  the  beginning,  it 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  93 

was  beautiful,  hath  a  unity,  and  design,  and  end,  towards 
which  it  all  proceeded,  and  without  which  it  was  altogether 
incomplete ;  to  wit,  the  personal  manifestation  of  Himself  in 
visible  power  and  majesty.  And  as  the  physiologists,  who 
study  the  various  tribes  of  living  things  upon  the  earth,  do 
tell  you  that  the  whole  series  of  the  creatures,  upwards  to 
man,  are  but,  as  it  were,  efforts  of  nature  to  produce  the 
parts  of  which  man's  body  is  composed  ;  studies  and  mould- 
ings of  the  several  fragments,  which  in  him  are  all  sweetly 
and  harmoniously  recomposed  ;  so  do  I  say  that  the  creation 
of  pure  spirits  in  heaven,  and  upon  earth  of  creatures  made 
up  of  body  and  spirit,  was  but  designing  and  making  of  the 
parts,  and  the  preparations  for  the  constituting  of  that  divine 
form  of  being  which  in  Christ  Jesus  appeared,  and  in  Christ 
Jesus  shall  to  eternity  abide  the  most  glorious  Head  for  all 
creatures  to  conform  and  submit  themselves  unto,  in  the  wor- 
ship and  service  of  the  invisible  God  and  Father  of  all.  In 
angels  we  have  pure  and  unmixed  spirits  to  give  a  manifesta- 
tion of  spirit,  and  of  the  functions  of  pure  spirits ;  such  as 
understanding,  righteousness,  love,  &c. ;  but  in  man  we  have 
the  functions  of  spirit  made  visible  by  being  breathed  into 
tabernacles  of  clay,  in  order  therewith  to  make  a  manifesta- 
tion of  body  also  with  its  several  properties  of  comprehending 
space,  and  possessing  the  material  creation  ; — the  first  being, 
as  it  were,  a  part  of  the  second  ;  and  the  second  but,  as  it 
were,  the  type  of  that  Divine  form  of  being  which  Christ  was 
to  be.  For,  as  hath  been  set  forth  in  the  former  head  of  dis- 
course, "Adam  was  but  the  type  of  Him  that  was  to  come," 
that  is,  Adam  was  not  the  perfect  work,  but  the  type  or  fore- 
shewing  of  it ;  even  as  the  tabernacle  was  but  the  type  of  the 
Church  which  now  is.  And  therefore  the  Creator  said,  "  Let 
us  make  man  in  our  own  image,  after  our  own  likeness  ;"  by 
which  word  of  God  I  understand,  not  a  likeness  in  respect  to 
the  moral  righteousness  of  His  Spirit  merely,  for  this  is  pos- 
sessed by  the  elect  angels  also  ;  but  in  respect  likewise  to  the 
composite  and  mixed  character  of  his  person,  made  up  of  body 
and  spirit ;  to  signify  that  he  was  the  type,  image,  or  likeness 
of  that  form  of  being  in  which  God  was  hereafter  to  be  re- 
vealed, and  for  ever  manifested  :  and,  accordingly,  the  Creator 


94  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

proceeded,  after  having  spoken  this  word,  to  fashion  him  a 
body  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  afterward  to  breathe  into 
his  nostrils  the  spirit  of  life,  and  he  became  a  living  soul.  So 
when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  the  Christ,  or  Second 
Adam,  had  at  first  a  body  prepared  for  Him  from  the  woman's 
substance,  and  a  reasonable  soul  given  unto  Him  by  the  Crea- 
tor, according  as  it  is  in  our  Catechism,  "  He  took  unto  Him- 
self a  human  body  and  a  reasonable  soul."  To  which  the 
Son  of  God,  the  eternal  Word,  having  joined  Himself  in  con- 
substantial  union,  He  became  the  Son  of  man  and  the  Son  of 
God,  in  "  two  distinct  natures  and  one  person  for  ever."  The 
Divine  creature  (creature  as  man)  Avas  composed,  the  end  of 
creation  accomplished,  and  God,  the  eternal  and  invisible 
God,  made  manifest  in  a  person,  to  all  creation,  for  ever  and 
for  ever.  This  is  the  first  idea  which  I  would  impress  upon 
your  minds,  as  indispensable  to  the  right  conception  of  the 
glory  which  was  brought  to  God  by  the  Son  of  man  upon  the 
earth ;  and  indispensable  to  the  understanding  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  in  which  the  same  is  often  taught,  as  I  now  proceed 
to  shew  you. 

In  the  3d  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  at  the  14th  verse,  it  is 
thus  written  :  "  These  things  saith  the  Amen,  the  faithful  and 
true  Witness,  the  Beginning  of  the  Creation  of  God."  Here 
in  a  message  given  by  Christ  from  His  own  mouth  to  John, 
to  be  delivered  by  him  to  the  Laodicean  church.  He  calleth 
Himself  "the  Amen  ;"  that  is,  the  Be  it  so,  which  I  conceive  to 
mean  that  He  is  the  end  of  the  purposes  of  God.  For  a 
prayer  containeth  the  wish  or  purpose  of  the  soul,  and  the 
Amen  doth  as  it  were  collect  it  all  into  one,  so  that  in 
saying  the  Amen  we  do  concentrate  the  whole  in  one  word  : 
wherefore  Christ  by  calling  Himself  the  Amen,  doth  signify 
that  the  Divine  will  and  purpose  of  the  great  decree  of  God, 
and  of  all  the  creatures,  was  consummated  and  concentrated  in 
one  person,  Himself  He  nameth  himself,  also,  "the  faithful 
and  true  Witness;"  that  is,  the  opener  of  the  mystery,  and  the 
revealer  of  the  invisible  God,  in  whom  is  truth,  and  out  of  whom 
is  no  truth  :  the  only  true  one,  as  it  is  written,  "  Let  God," 
that  is,  the  Word  of  God,  (for  of  God  himself  hath  no  one 
heard  the  voice  at  any  time,)  "  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar." 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  95 

He  further  nameth  Himself,  "  The  Beginning  of  the  Creation 
of  God;"  not  the  beginner  only,  but  the  beginning  of  the 
creation  of  God.  That  He  was  the  Creator,  in  His  Divinity 
of  the  Word,  is  sufficiently  testified  in  the  opening  of  John's 
Gospel ;  but  there  is  a  greater  mystery  in  His  being  the  be- 
ginning of  His  own  work.  Yet,  true  it  is,  however  paradoxical 
it  may  seem,  that  to  make  Himself,  that  is,  to  make  His  mani- 
fest and  visible  form,  was  the  first  beginning,  the  mainspring 
and  only  end  of  the  purpose  of  God,  and  of  the  Word  in 
creating;  for  which  the  creation  of  a  spiritual  world,  as  hath 
been  said,  was  one  preparative  step,  and  the  creation  of  a  ma- 
terial world  another ;  and  the  combination  of  both  in  Adam 
was,  as  it  were,  the  type,  image,  or  resemblance.  Therefore 
doth  Christ  call  Himself  the  Beginning  of  the  Creation  of  God; 
not  that  from  Him  it  had  its  beginning,  (though  that  be  most 
true,)  but  that  in  Him  it  had  its  beginning  ;  being  the  first- 
born in  the  purpose  and  idea,  and  for  the  birth  of  whom,  all 
which  went  before  in  time  was  but,  as  it  were,  the  cradle  in 
which  to  lay  Him,  the  bands  with  which  to  swathe  Him,  the 
nurse  to  rear  Him,  the  family  which  was  to  be  honoured  in 
His  birth,  and  the  servants  who  should  attend  upon  Him,  and 
the  multitudes  who  should  be  blessed  in  Him.  So  much,  and 
much  more,  is  couched  in  the  name,  "  The  Beginning  of  the 
Creation  of  God." 

The  next  passage  to  v/hich  I  would  direct  your  attention,  as 
confirmatory  of  this  great  idea,  is  in  the  first  chapter  of  the 
Colossians,  at  the  13th  verse,  where,  speaking  of  the  Son  in  His 
character  of  Jesus  the  Saviour,  and  of  Christ  the  Lord  of  the 
kingdom,  it  is  thus  written  :  "  The  Father  who  hath  delivered 
us  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and  translated  us  into  the 
kingdom  of  his  dear  Son,  in  whom  we  have  redemption 
through  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  This  shews 
us  that  it  is  of  the  Son  as  man,  as  the  sacrifice  and  mediation, 
and  Lord,  the  apostle  speaketh,  manifested  in  flesh,  to  redeem 
us  by  His  blood  ;  of  whom  it  is  immediately  added,  "  Who  is 
the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  first-born  of  every  crea- 
ture." Now  I  am  not  ignorant  how  the  Socinians  wrest  this 
passage  to  make  out  of  it  their  damnable  heresy,  that  Christ 
is  no  more  than  a  creature;  and  how  the  orthodox,  in  order 


96  THE  INCARNATION: 

to  deliver  it  out  of  their  hand,  allege,  that  it  is  only  a  forcible 
way  of  saying  "born  before  every  creature;"  as  Milton  says, 
"The  fairest  of  her  daughters,  Eve;"  the  haste  of  the  mind 
running  the  contrast  into  a  comparison.     But  this,  though  an 
honest  enough  shift,  is  not  needed  by  one  who  understandeth 
to  discourse  of  the  humanity  as  well  as  of  the  divinity  of 
Christ,  who,  as  the  Son  of  man,  was  a  creature,  as  the  Son  of 
God,  was  the  Creator  of  all  things  ;  and  as  the  Christ,  eter- 
nally comprehending  the  two  natures  in  one,  may  be  spoken  of, 
and  is  spoken  of,  both  as  the  Creator  and  as  a  creature ;  but 
when  spoken  of  as  a  creature,  always  presented  as  the  object  and 
end  of  all  creation,  in  order  to  be  the  Head  and  Lord  of  all  His 
own  works.     And  that  this  is  the  true  idea  of  the  passage  is 
manifest  from  the  following  verse,  which  is  added  to  explain  this 
powerful,  yet  enigmatical  expression,   "First-born  of  every 
creature,"  and  to  guard  against  the  Arianism  which  might  be 
grafted  thereon :  "  For  by  him  were  all  things  created  that 
are   in  heaven  and  that  are  in  earth,  visible  and  invisible, 
whether  thrones  or  dominions,  or   principalities  or  powers. 
All  things  were  created  by  him  and  for  him  ;  and  he  is  before 
all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist."     To  guard  against 
the  confounding  of  His  eternal  being,  as  the  Word,  with  His 
created  being  as  the  Son  of  man,  it  is  first  declared  that  He 
created  all  things  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  of  every  rank  and 
order  and  name,  both  spiritual  and  material,  which  is  the 
great  attribute  claimed  by  Jehovah  throughout  the  Old  Tes- 
tament ;  for  a  creature  can  create  nothing,  otherwise  all  dis- 
tinction between  Creator  and  creature  is  abolished.     Then, 
to  expound  the  other  part  of  the  mystery,  that  they  were  not 
only  created  by  His  divine  power,  but  for  Him  as  their  great 
Possessor  and  Lord  in  His  visible  humanity,  it  is  added,  ''All 
were  created  by  Him  and  for  Him;"  or  rather  "unto  Him," 
who  should  in  the  end,  when  the  work  was  complete,  be 
brought  in  to  inherit  them  all  in  His  character  of  Christ  and 
Lord,  of  Son  and  Heir.     Wherefore,  it  is  immediately  added, 
"  And  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist. 
And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the  church ;    who  is  the 
beginning,  the  first-begotten  from  the  dead,"  &c.     But  here 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  97 

he  entereth  upon  another  idea,  which  it  is  not  now  the  time 
to  bring  forward. 

These  two  passages  explain  and  confirm  the  doctrine  which 
we  have  laid  down  above,  that  creation  was  without  a  head, 
and,  to  appearance,  without  a  plan,  until  Jesus  Christ  was 
brought  into  being  that  night  the  angels  sang  their  choral 
symphony  over  His  birth.  The  glory  of  God  in  the  crea- 
tures was  not  manifested  ;  the  whole  creation  seemed  abor- 
tive ;  a  mighty  maze  without  a  plan ;  scattered  members 
without  a  head  ;  incomplete,  and  incompetent  to  its  own 
defence ;  at  the  mercy  of  an  antagonist  and  estranging 
power,  which  was  ever  invading  it,  and  with  success ;  it 
seemed  wavering  and  uncertain,  both  in  the  spiritual  and  in 
the  material  parts  of  it ;  it  was  rebellious  and  disobedient ; 
— all  which  bespoke  not  disappointment  nor  defeat,  but  pre- 
sent incompleteness  and  confusion,  and  instability,  which 
might  be  brought  into  fair  proportion,  finished  beauty,  and 
immoveable  steadfastness,  but  certainly  was  not  as  yet  ar- 
rived at  that  glorious  consummation  and  crowning  point  of 
perfectness.  The  physiologist  knoweth  what  the  animal  crea- 
tion would  be  without  man  ;  how  unintelligible,  how  inglo- 
rious !  And  an  architect  knoweth  what  an  arch  were  without 
its  head  key-stone  ;  a  sinking  ruin,  needing  to  be  propped  up 
and  sustained  on  every  side.  And  the  moralist  knoweth 
what  man  is  without  a  righteous  law  and  steadfast  will.  Such 
the  Christian  knoweth,  or  ought  to  know,  the  fabric  of  the 
universe  would  be  without  Christ,  who  is  "the  Alpha  and 
the  Omega,  the  Beginning  and  the  Ending,  which  was,  and 
which  is,  and  which  is  to  come,  the  Almighty."  I  think  I 
need  not  insist  upon  this  idea  any  further ;  and  therefore  do 
proceed  to  open  another  of  a  still  loftier  strain, — which  is, 
how  the  Son  of  man  manifested  God's  glory  in  the  opening 
of  the  decree  of  election,  and  thereon  founding  all  preaching 
for  ever. 

2.  While  creation  stood  thus  without  its  Head,  and  the 

parts  of  it  were  in  the  state  of  being  brought  together,  beings 

had  come  forth  from  the  infinite  womb  of  the  creating  Word, 

wherein  all  the  purposes  of  the  Father  are  in  eternal  reality  : 

VOL.  V.  G 


98  THE  INCARNATION: 

being  come  forth,  they  were  without  their  Lord  and  Guar- 
dian, and  I  may  say  it  was  in  a  manner  necessary  that  they 
should  come  by  loss  and  suffer  change.  For,  if  they  had 
been  in  as  much  safety  and  security  without  a  Head  as  with 
one,  or  in  as  much  perfection  and  beauty,  then  where  were 
the  glory,  where  were  the  use  of  any  Head  ?  If,  while  God 
was  invisible,  the  condition  of  the  visible  or  invisible  creation 
had  been  as  profitable  to  His  glory,  or  to  its  own  blessedness, 
as  when  He  should  become  visible,  then  for  what  end  be- 
cometh  He  visible  ?  Or  if  the  creation  had  been  perfect  and 
sufficient  while  yet  the  Christ  was  unconstituted,  then  why 
should  there  be  a  Christ  at  all  ?  There  cannot  be  two  per- 
fections, there  cannot  be  two  unchangeables,  otherwise  there 
were  two  gods.  The  infirmity  of  every  creature  must  be 
shewn  in  order  that  the  stability  of  Christ  may  be  established; 
the  inconstancy  of  every  spiritual,  and  of  every  material  crea- 
ture must  be  proved,  in  order  that  the  only  constancy  and 
unchangeableness  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  holy  thing 
born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  might  be  made  to  appear.  Yea, 
and  if  the  spiritual  creation  had  not  thus  been  difterenced 
from  the  creation  of  spirits,  and  if  the  material  creation  had 
not  in  like  manner  been  differenced  from  the  body  of  Christ, 
they  would  have  become  objects  of  idolatry  to  themselves, 
self-sufficient  creatures,  not  knowing  that  they  needed,  nor 
desiring  to  have  a  Head,  a  Guardian,  a  Governor  and  Protec- 
tor and  Saviour  over  them.  If  the  end  of  creation  was  the 
Christ,  then  all  creation  must  see  and  feel  itself  incomplete 
without  Him ;  and  so  long  for  Him,  and  pray  for  His  coming, 
and  rejoice  at  His  coming;  feeling  that  till  He  comes  there 
is  for  them  nothing  but  ineffectual  labours,  and  abortive 
attempts  to  bring  forth.  And  this  is  the  great  end  and  pur- 
pose of  sin  in  the  creation  of  God,  which,  if  you  consider  it 
well,  is  as  essential  to  the  fulness  of  the  scheme,  as  is  creation 
itself  Sin  is  the  demonstration  of  a  creature's  instability  in 
itself,  when  it  hath  come  forth  from  the  Word  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father,  and  standeth  outward,  while  as  yet  the  Word, 
its  former  stability,  is  not  outwardly  revealed.  It  proveth 
that,  unless  the  Creator  also  become  manifest,  the  creature 
will  die  and  decay  away,  and  hath  the  continuance  of  its 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  99 

being  only  for  the  sake  of,  and  in  the  hope  of,  and  in  the 
desire  of  that  manifestation.  Sin  is  not  a  thing  created  of 
God,  but  it  is  a  condition  of  the  creatures,  demonstrative  of 
their  inferiority  to  the  Creator,  and  their  inabihty  to  subsist 
without  Him.  Every  creature  is  made  liable  to  sin,  yea,  and 
will  continue  so  until  they  be  gathered  again  into  their 
Head  which  is  Christ.  This  is  a  great  mystery,  brethren,  but 
most  needful  to  be  discoursed  of  and  searched  into,  if  we 
would  understand  any  of  the  inferior  mysteries  which  depend 
from  it. 

Therefore,  I  will  go  further,  and  assert  that  all  the  creatures 
must  have  fallen  into  sin,  both  angels  and  men,  had  not  God, 
by  a  special  purpose,  yea,  and  decree  of  election,  chosen 
some,  and  given  them  a  more  than  creature  standing,  the 
higher  standing  of  His  own  will  and  absolute  decree,  for  the 
purposes  of  His  own  glory,  and  the  glory  of  His  Christ — 
who  are  said  to  be  chosen  in  Christ  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  and  to  be  predestinated  according  to  the  purpose 
of  Him  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  pleasure  of  His  will; 
and  it  is  called  the  purpose  of  God  according  to  election, 
"  not  of  works,  but  of  Him  that  calleth."  But  for  the  rein- 
closure  of  them  in  Christ,  by  an  absolute  decree,  I  say  again 
that  all  angels  and  all  men,  by  reason  of  the  necessary  and 
essential  infirmity  of  the  creature,  while  outward  with  respect 
to  the  sustaining  Word,  must  have  perished  by  falling  into 
sin.  For  though  created  without  sin,  as  coming  forth  from 
the  pure  and  spotless  Word,  it  is  not  possible  they  should  so 
continue,  unless  upheld  by  an  express  act  of  the  Creator's 
will,  that,  for  the  glory  of  Christ  and  as  a  part  of  the  great 
plan,  it  should  be  so  ordered  and  brought  to  pass.  Nor  let 
any  one  object  to  this,  for  it  is  the  written  truth  of  God, 
which  our  objecting  availeth  not  to  set  aside  :  and  while  any 
one  objecteth,  he  doth  so  far  forth  as  he  objecteth  declare 
himself  to  be  a  rebel  against  His  will,  and  in  a  reprobate 
state.  For  what  and  though  all  the  angels  had  fallen,  as 
certainly  they  would  if  there  had  not  been  a  decree  of  elec- 
tion ;  what  and  though  all  men  had  fallen  irrecoverably,  as 
they  would  if  there  had  not  been  a  decree  of  election,  who 
could  have  complained .-'     Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  Him 


lOO  THE  INCARNATION: 

who  formed  it,  Why  hast  thou  formed  me  thus  ?  Shall  not 
the  Creator  have  the  power  of  demonstrating  the  instability 
of  all  things  out  of  Himself  in  order  that  they  may  know 
their  stability  in  Himself?  It  is  such  arrogancy,  it  is  such 
monstrous  arrogancy  to  answer  against  God  and  say,  Nay, 
but  if  Thou  wilt  create,  the  creature  which  Thou  Greatest  has 
a  right  to  Thine  own  immutability ;  Thou  must  make  him 
infallible  as  Thyself,  or  Thou  must  not  make  him  at  all.  And 
besides  the  arrogancy,  consider  also  the  folly  of  it,  for  how 
should  the  Creator  be  otherwise  differenced  from  the  creature, 
than  by  shewing  that  the  creature  is  unstable,  and  permitting 
it  to  fall ;  for  otherwise  the  creature  might  leap  up  and  say, 
yea,  must  necessarily  both  feel  and  say,  that  he  is  inde- 
pendent on  and  upon  a  level  with  the  Creator,  if  so  be  he 
hath  obtained  the  gift  of  infallibility  and  unchangeableness  in 
his  creation.  Nay,  but  God  is  Aviser  than  to  set  such  rivalry 
afloat  by  constituting  such  independent  creatures. 

But  to  ascend  a  little  higher  still,  His  will,  His  absolute 
will,  His  will  not  to  be  predetermined  by  anything  without 
itself,  were  also  unseen,  and,  being  unseen,  were  unacknow- 
ledged, if  there  was  no  creature  sustained  thereby  against  the 
disposition  of  its  own  being,  and  the  condition  of  the  other 
creatures  whereof  it  is  a  part:  and  if  the  will  of  God  were  not 
to  be  manifested  by  a  continuity  of  such  instances,  brethren, 
we  should  all  rush  headlong  into  Atheism.  To  me  it  is  a 
necessary  thing,  a  thing  it  is  most  necessary  to  my  loyal 
obedience  of  God's  will,  to  see  in  the  Church  a  holy  genera- 
tion maintained  by  the  Divine  will  against  the  law  of  corrup- 
tion, which  the  world  underlieth  ;  and  in  respect  to  the  sinful 
world,  which  is  working  on  in  its  wickedness,  it  is  necessary 
for  me  to  believe  most  surely  that  in  the  good  time  of  God 
that  wicked  order  of  things  shall,  by  an  act  of  the  Divine  will, 
be  destroyed ;  and  in  respect  to  •  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
whose  regular  and  unchanged  motions  have  made  them  to 
be  worshipped  in  all  ages,  from  the  Chaldeans  of  old  down 
to  the  scientific  men  of  the  nineteenth  century,  it  is  neces- 
sary for  me  to  believe  that  there  is  a  time  coming  when  they 
shall,  of  mere  will,  be  changed  and  removed  like  a  scroll ; 
for   new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth,  and    a   new  condition 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  lOi 

of  men  and  things,  which  shall  come  into  being  when  our 
glorious  Head  is  revealed  from' the  place  of  the  right  hand  of 
God,  where  He  is  at  present  hidden.  Otherwise,  for  want  of 
a  manifested  will,  we  should  all  become  Atheists.  For  all 
astronomers,  who, have  looked  upon  the  steady  and  unchang- 
ing motions  of  the  heavens,  from  the  time  of  the  Chaldeans 
to  that  of  the  French  Institute,  have  in  the  end  become 
idolaters  and  Avorshippers  of  them.  Why  .''  Because  they 
seem  unchangeably  fixed  under  the  law  of  cause  and  effect, 
and  the  spirit  of  man  acknowledgcth  unchangeableness  to  be 
an  attribute  of  God  only ;  and  to  guard  against  this,  it  is  re- 
vealed not  only  that  they  were  created,  but  that  they  are  to 
be  changed  in  the  time  of  the  bringing  in  of  the  Great  Head 
of  creation.  So  have  the  chemists  done  in  these  latter  times, 
and,  I  may  say,  the  physiologists,  and  all  manner  of  natu- 
ralists, who  have  no  other  god  than  that  piece  of  matter,  the 
constancy  of  whose  law  of  cause  and  effect  they  are  observ- 
ing ;  and  thus  hath  science  become  to  them  a  religion.  And 
why  ?  Because,  being  under  the  law  of  cause  and  effect,  it 
exhibits  no  unaccountable  changes  or  vicissitudes ;  no  acts  of 
simple  will ;  it  makes  no  discoveries  of  a  will  without  a  cause  ; 
an  absolute  unconditional  will  the  cause  of  itself  And  there- 
in a  religion  is  distinguished  from  a  science,  that  it  proceed- 
eth  out  of  a  Will,  and  addresses  itself  to  a  Will.  And  this 
wretched  Arminianism,  by  putting  out  of  sight  the  absolute 
unconditional  acts  of  the  Divine  Will  in  the  decree  of  elec- 
tion, doth  hasten  to  make  the  Christian  religion  into  a  moral 
science;  and  to  bring  the  Almighty  Will  under  the  moral 
law,  instead  of  making  all  law  to  flow  from  His  will.  Politi- 
cal economy  is  also  fast  becoming  a  religion  by  the  same  pro- 
cess. For  men  are  beginning  to  discover  in  that  department 
also  the  uniformity  of  the  laws  of  God's  providence  over 
nations ;  perceiving  the  law  of  cause  and  effect  in  this  also, 
they  transfer  to  it  an  attribute  of  the  Creator,  for  which  they 
worship  the  ends  of  that  science,  and  make  its  study  their  re- 
ligion, and  its  law  their  God.  How  much  more,  if  there  had 
been  no  evil  in  the  working  of  human  society,  nor  discord  or 
violence  in  the  processes  of  creation,  should  we  have  been 
ready  to  cast  the  remembrance  of  God  and  the  fear  of  Him 


I02  THE  INCARNATION : 

away,  for  the  worship  of  the  creature,  or  of  ourselves,  or  of 
some  portion  of  nature  which  we  saw  and  felt  ?  And  truly 
the  fall  did  thus  proceed  both  in  angels  and  in  men.  Feeling 
their  own  power,  the  law  and  order  of  their  own  being,  they 
thought  themselves  to  be  a  law  unto  themselves,  and  by  de- 
grees fell  out  of  the  reverence  and  remembrance  of  God  ;  and 
God,  in  mercy,  for  this  cause  gave  to  Adam  an  outward  re- 
membrance of  duty  in  the  forbidden  tree.  Therefore  I  say 
the  chain  must  be  broken,  the  lesson  of  all  creation's  instabi- 
lity must  be  taught,  and  God's  only  stable  will  revealed  ; 
otherwise  every  creature's  independency  would  be  established, 
and  the  scheme  of  God  to  manifest  Himself  as  the  only  stabi- 
lity and  sustenance  of  the  outward  world  would  be  defeated. 
Forasmuch  then  as  the  very  purpose  of  bringing  in  the 
Christ  Head  of  all  things,  doth  involve  in  it  not  only  the  pos- 
sibility but  the  necessity  of  a  fall  in  every  other  form  of  crea- 
ture, in  order  to  place  a  difference,  and  to  prove  that  this  is  not 
the  Christ,  nor  this,  nor  this,  and  that  some  more  stable  form 
of  being  is  yet  to  be  waited  for ;  most  necessary  it  is,  if  any 
created  beings  stand,  that  they  should  stand  in  a  stability  not 
pertaining  to  them  as  creatures,  but  in  the  free,  sovereign,  and 
absolute  will  of  the  Creator,  that,  for  certain  ends  of  His  glory, 
they  shall  be  made  an  exception  to  the  general  and  universal 
law.  Those,  I  say,  who  stand  through  these  evil  days  of  the 
infancy  and  imperfection  of  the  work,  (infantine  and  imperfect 
only,  because  it  is  in  a  train  and  progress  towards  perfection,) 
must  stand  inclusively  in  Christ,  not  exclusively  out  of  Christ, 
in  the  exceptive  decree  of  election,  not  in  their  own  creature 
prerogative  and  power.  And,  brethren,  it  is  a  great  proof  and 
token  of  the  goodness  of  God  that  when  there  was  a  possibility 
of  the  creature's  faUing,  by  coming  into  being,  there  was  a 
possibility  also  of  his  standing  by  being  included  in  the  decree 
of  election,  which  God  had  made  for  the  ends  of  His  own  glory 
in  the  glory  of  Christ.  For  I  never  doubt,  as  I  observed  in 
the  former  part  of  my  discourse,  that  to  the  angels  was  given 
the  knowledge  not  only  of  their  infirmity  in  themselves,  but 
also  of  their  stability  in  the  decree  of  election,  which  was  made 
in  Christ,  the  first-born  of  every  creature.  For  if  the  angels, 
as  we  have  set  forth,  were  a  preparation  for  the  bringing  in  of 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  103 

Christ,  made  like  all  other  things  for  Him,  that  is,  with  a  view 
to  Him ;  then  it  is  most  reasonable  to  believe,  or  rather  can- 
not otherwise  be  believed,  but  that  they  should  have  been 
made  aware  thereof,  and  so  taught  how  to  stand  in  the  hope 
of  Him  that  was  about  to  come:  otherwise  they  would  not 
have  possessed  the  knowledge  of  the  law  of  their  own  being, 
of  their  weakness  in  themselves  and  their  strength  in  the  de- 
cree of  election  :  which  if  they  did  not  know,  we  cannot  con- 
ceive how  they  could  incur  guilt :  but  guilt  we  know  they  did 
incur,  and  from  thence  we  infer  that  they  both  knew  their 
frailty  in  themselves  and  their  sufficiency  in  the  decree.  In- 
deed, had  there  not  been  such  a  decree  of  election,  in  the 
strength  of  which  every  creature  that  was  created  might  have 
stood,  that  creature  would  not  have  been  created  for  Christ, 
but  for  falling  into  the  power  of  sin.  But,  while  I  assert  the 
necessity  of  sin  as  a  part  of  the  great  scheme,  I  wholly  dis- 
allow that  any  creature  was  made  for  sin,  but  every  creature 
for  Christ ;  and  that  if  it  had  been  contented  to  rest  its  sta- 
bility upon  the  decree  of  election,  and  wait,  patiently  hoping 
for  the  coming  of  Christ  to  give  to  it  its  eternal  stability,  then 
all  the  creatures  might  have  stood  which  now  are  fallen.  This, 
no  doubt,  the  angels  had  made  known  unto  them  from  the 
first ;  and  in  forgetting  this,  or  in  rebelling  against  it,  con- 
sisteth  their  unpardonable  transgression.  And  this  is  all  con- 
firmed by  the  history  of  the  creation  of  man,  who  was  made 
in  his  creature-perfection  before  the  fall,  and  evinced  his 
creature-weakness  in  that  state.  As  yet  the  decree  of  election 
was  not  revealed  to  him ;  and  the  divines  do  rightly  call 
this  another  covenant,  namely,  that  of  works.  But  from  the 
time  he  fell,  the  promise  of  the  Christ  was  revealed ;  and 
from  this  time  forth  the  stability  of  mankind  was  declared 
to  be,  "  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth, 
but  of  God  that  sheweth  mercy."  And  little  as  these  Ar- 
minians  think  of  it  who  raise  their  loud  and  incoherent 
voice  against  the  decree  of  election,  it  is  thence,  and  thence 
only,  that  grace  and  mercy  and  forgiveness  can  proceed  ; 
so  that  they  are  drinking  of  the  streams,  and  speaking 
against  the  well-spring  and  fountain  from  which  they  all  flow. 
For  true  is  the  apostle's  reasoning,  that  "  if  it  be  of  works. 


I04  THE  INCARNATION: 

then  is  it  not  of  grace,  otherwise  work  is  no  more  work." 
There  are  only  two  ways  in  which  a  creature  can  exist  :  it 
must  either  exist  in  its  own  creature-strength,  which  I  have 
shewn  must  be  frangible,  yea,  and  fractured  also ;  or  it  must 
stand  in  the  decree  of  election, — that  is,  in  the  will  of  God,  for 
the  ends  of  that  glory  which  creation  is  working  out,  the  glory 
of  manifesting  Himself  in  an  outward  being. 

From  these  ideas  concerning  the  entering  in  of  sin,  we  de- 
rive the  true  doctrine  concerning  Christ  the  Redeemer  of 
God's  elect,  angels  and  men ;  for  these  are  both  included  in 
the  account  of  the  Christian  Church  given  in  the  Hebrews : 
"  Ye  are  come  unto  mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the 
living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to  an  innumerable 
company  of  angels,  to  the  general  assembly  of  the  first  born, 
whose  names  are  written  in  heaven."  And  they  are  included 
together  in  the  doctrine  of  our  Church  concerning  this  point 
which  saith,  "  By  the  decree  of  God,  for  the  manifestation  of 
His  glory,  some  men  and  angels  are  predestinated  unto  ever- 
lasting life."  And  again,  "  These  angels  and  men  thus  pre- 
destinated and  foreordained  are  particularly  and  unchange- 
ably designed."  These,  all  these,  have  stood,  are  standing, 
and  shall  stand  only  in  Christ,  but  for  whom  the  former  would 
have  been  involved ;  and  the  latter,  being  involved,  would 
have  continued  in  irretrievable  ruin :  their  redemption  thence 
being  for  Christ's  sake,  and  by  virtue  of  their  faith  in  Christ. 
Therefore  also,  in  the  picture  of  His  coming  power  and  ma- 
jesty, which  is  represented  to  us  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  angels, 
join  the  ransorned  from  among  men  in  the  song  of  praise  unto 
the  Lamb,  saying,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  to  receive  power 
and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory, 
and  blessing  !"  And  finally,  as  to  the  work  which  He  accom- 
plished upon  earth,  and  by  which  He  brought  glory  to  God  in 
becoming  their  Redeemer  ;  I  may  say  their  redemption  was 
but  a  veiled  mystery,  and  the  glory  of  it  a  clouded  glory, 
until  Christ  finished  the  work  of  His  humiliation,  when  the 
veil  was  lifted  up,  and  the  clouds  passed  away  from  the  face 
of  the  glory.  Till  then,  the  decree  by  which  they  stood  was 
undeclared,  or  but  dimly  presented  in  its  faint  outline,  but 
now  the  grace  and  mercy  and  love  of  it  was  fully  declared. 


-     ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  105 

The  name  of  God  was  manifested  ;  the  words  which  He  had 
given  unto  Christ,  Christ  had  made  for  ever  known,  and  here 
they  arc  unfolded  in  the  gospel  of  the  New  Testament.  How 
much  of  love  there  is  in  that  decree,  beyond  the  goodness  of 
creation,  is  manifested  in  God's  giving  up  His  only-begotten 
and  well-beloved  Son  to  the  death  for  us  all !  How  much  of 
mercy  is  manifested  in  the  free  forgiveness  of  the  sins  of  the 
elect  who  believe  !  How  much  of  grace,  in  the  fulness  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  coming  to  renew  them  in  the  image  of  God  and 
righteousness  and  true  holiness  !  How  much  of  justice,  in  the 
exact  obedience  and  extreme  sufferings  of  the  God-man !  How 
much  of  holiness,  in  all  these  combined  together  !  All  which, 
and  whatever  else  is  manifested  in  the  work  of  Christ,  was  seen 
like  an  object  from  afar,  small  and  indistinct,  yet  believed  and 
rejoiced  in  by  all  the  elect  of  God:  it  remained  for  Christ  to 
bring  it  near,  and  display  it  in  all  the  magnificence  of  its  Divine 
proportions.  This  opening  of  the  promise,  this  fulfilling  of 
every  previous  word  of  God,  this  declaring  of  the  decree  of 
election,  and  bodying  forth  of  the  goodness  thereof,  was  the 
great  and  mighty  work  which  Christ  the  Prophet  performed  ; 
and  in  this  state  He  left  it  for  His  Church  to  hold  up  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  until  He  shall  come  again  to  open  another 
volume  of  the  book,  by  gathering  together  the  scattered  wit- 
nesses, and  presenting  them  a  glorious  company,  under  their 
glorious  Head,  in  the  presence  of  His  eternal  Father;  into 
which  subj  ect  Ave  enter  not. 

3,  The  manner  of  this  work  was  as  marvellous  as  the  end 
of  it  was  glorious.  By  being  created  a  living  soul,  which, 
Paul  saith,  "  understandeth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,"  there  was  another  condition  of  being  still  left  for  man 
to  come  into,  the  region  of  the  spiritual ;  for  the  first  Adam 
was  but  the  type  of  the  Second  Adam  ;  the  first  man  being  a 
living  soul,  the  second  a  quickening  Spirit.  The  type  was 
broken,  whose  fragments  we  now  behold  in  this  our  natural 
form  of  being ;  having  a  taste  of  all  knowledge,  save  the 
knowledge  of  spiritual  things ;  and  a  love  of  all  excellency, 
save  that  of  God  ;  and  making  progress  in  all  sciences,  save 
that  of  theology,  which  we  corrupt,  which  from  time  to  time 
God  doth  purify,  but  can  by  no  means  obtain  for  it  a  seat  in 


io6  THE  INCARNATION: 

the  world,  as  we  behold  at  this  day.  But  this  breaking  of 
the  goodly  type  of  Christ,  which  Adam  was,  did  only  prepare 
the  way  for  the  advancement  of  Adam,  and  of  all  who  pre- 
ferred to  stand  in  the  decree  of  election,  to  the  higher  rank 
of  the  combined  material  and  spiritual  creature,  which  is  the 
form  of  creation's  Lord.  And,  in  order  to  this  preferment, 
Christ  took  of  the  virgin  the  humanity  of  Adam ;  not  sinful, 
indeed,  for  He  came  not  by  ordinary  generation,  but  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  yet,  though  not  sinful,  liable  to  all 
the  temptations  of  sin  to  which  human  nature  ever  had  been 
or  ever  could  be  liable  :  "  Being  in  the  form  of  God,  he  was 
made  in  the  likeness  of  man ;  and  being  found  in  fashion 
as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto 
death."  In  that  He  truly  died,  it  proveth  that  He  truly  was  ob- 
noxious to  every  human  infirmity  ;  in  that  He  rose  from  the 
dead,  it  equally  proveth  that  He  had  done  no  sin,  for  which 
He  might  see  the  corruption  of  the  grave.  Now,  it  was  not 
an  arbitrary  thing  that  the  Christ  should  thus  be  brought 
into  the  world ;  nor  was  it  merely  to  redeem  man  ;  but  to 
become  the  Lord  of  all,  by  establishing  the  weakness  of  all, 
and  working  out  the  stability  of  all.  Had  He  been  destined 
to  be  Lord  of  spirit  only.  He  would  have  partaken  of  the 
angelic  nature  :  but  having  to  be  the  Lord  of  matter  also.  He 
partook  of  the  nature  of  man,  which  is  composed  of  both. 
And  of  this  He  partook,  not  in  its  unfallen  state,  but  in  its 
fallen  state,  and  in  the  fallen  state  of  all  the  materialism  of 
the  world ;  in  order  that  He  might  enter  into  the  weakness 
of  everything,  and  add  to  it  regenerating  strength,  become 
the  uplifter  of  its  state  and  being,  and  its  support  through- 
out all  eternity.  Therefore  it  is  written,  "  But  we  see  Jesus, 
who  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  for  the  suffer- 
ing of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour;  that  he, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  should  taste  death  for  all."  And  again, 
"  Forasmuch  as  the  children  were  made  partakers  of  flesh 
and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same ; 
that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil,  and  deliver  them  who 
through  the  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject 
to   bondage."     And  again   it   is  written,    "  He  who  was  in 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  107 

the  form  of  God,  and  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal 
with  God,  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly 
exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above  every 
name ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of 
things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the 
earth;  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  From  which  pas- 
sage we  rightly  conclude,  that  there  redounded  unto  God  a 
great  glory  from  the  humiliation  of  the  Son  of  man  unto  the 
death,  beyond  that  which  redounded  from  the  completion  of 
creation's  work,  and  the  opening  of  the  decree  of  election. 
Which  glory  consisteth  in  the  extinguishing  of  the  power  of 
those  rebellious  spirits  which  had,  by  forsaking  the  standing 
of  election,  fallen  into  sin,  and  continued  therein,  fighting 
against  God  and  the  hope  of  Christ :  who  are  exceedingly  hate- 
ful in  the  sight  of  God,  because  they  continually  seek  to  de- 
stroy the  glory  of  His  Son,  and  to  force  themselves  into  a 
different  standing  from  that  of  election,  exalting  their  own 
will  against  the  will  of  God.  It  is  a  vain  thing  to  say  that 
God  loveth  sinners  and  ungodly  creatures :  He  extendeth 
mercy  and  grace  unto  them,  and  loveth  the  election  for  His 
Son's  sake ;  but  He  must  cease  to  love  His  Son — that  is,  to  love 
Himself — when  He  loveth  those  who  are  rebellious  against 
Himself  He  is  "  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  :"  He  can- 
not look  upon  the  workers  of  iniquity  but  with  detestation 
and  abhorrence.  It  is  one  of  the  sayings  of  that  wretched 
Arminianism  with  which  this  land  is  overflowed,  "  Hate  the 
sin,  but  love  the  sinner."  What  mean  they  }  that  sin  is  some- 
thing by  itself,  and  the  sinner  something  by  himself,  so  distinct 
from  one  another,  that  the  one  may  well  be  hated,  and  the 
other  may  well  be  loved }  They  know  nothing  at  all,  and 
they  will  know  nothing  at  all.  But  if  they  would  open  their 
ears  to  instruction,  then  might  they  be  taught  that  sin  is  the 
condition  of  an  apostate  creature,  the  form  of  a  rebellious  will, 
the  very  being  of  an  enemy  of  God  and  of  godliness.  To 
make  the  evil  of  which  to  cease,  to  destroy  its  eternal  activity 
against  God,  was  the  cause  of  our  Lord's  humiliation  in  the 
body  and  descent  into  hell.     By  which  powerful  and  perilous 


io8  THE  INCARNATION: 

ministry  He  did  overcome  and  vanquish  the  enemy,  and  hath 
him  and  his  dominions  in  His  power,  whenever  it  shall  please 
the  Father  to  allow  Him  to  enter  in  to  possess  them.  Death 
and  destruction  have  no  indefeasible  right  in  God's  creatures, 
but  only  a  derived  and  dependent  one ;  derived  from  and  de- 
pendent upon  sin  ;  which  Christ  having  resisted  and  overcome 
and  cast  out,  did  win  back  the  waste  and  the  wilderness  of 
this  world  from  the  occupancy  and  vexation  of  Satan  and  his 
angels  and  reprobate  men,  who  ever  since  have  stood  judged 
and  condemned,  not  knowing  of  a  day's  life,  but  expecting 
every  day  to  be  the  last  of  their  possession.  And  herein  con- 
sisteth  the  third  part  of  the  glory  which  Christ  brought  unto 
the  Father  by  the  work  which  He  wrought  upon  the  earth ;  not 
only  declaring  His  wrath  against  all  the  workers  of  iniquity, 
but  manifesting  that  their  power  was  broken,  and  their  right 
destroyed,  in  His  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;  Avhereby  the 
glory  of  God  was  wondrously  manifested  in  the  discomfiture 
of  all  His  enemies,  and  His  holiness  in  their  destruction 
abundantly  manifested :  as  we  shall  shew  at  length  in  our 
fourth  discourse. 

These  ideas,  brethren,  concerning  the  entering  in  of  sin 
may  seem  to  you  difficult  of  apprehension ;  but  I  could  not 
stir  a  foot  in  shewing  the  glory  of  the  decree  of  election  until 
I  should  have  first  explained  them  :  for  otherwise  it  is  but 
building  upon  the  sand.  Your  time  does  not  permit  me  to 
follow  out  this  part  of  my  subject  further  at  present.  The 
more  is  your  loss,  the  more  also  is  mine,  and,  what  is  more, 
the  loss  of  Christ's  Church,  that  our  customs  should  always 
step  in  just  when  we  have  passed  the  porch  of  the  sanctuary 
of  truth,  and  debar  us  of  the  feast  for  feasts  of  another  kind. 
Let  the  matter  then  stand  in  its  imperfection.  The  time 
may  come  when  the  saints  shall  again  call  upon  their  minis- 
ters to  lay  out  the  foundations  of  their  faith  before  them,  in- 
stead of  requiring  them  to  play  a  tune  upon  their  feelings, 
and  let  them  begone. 

And  thus  again,  dear  brethren,  have  I  sought  to  lay  before 
you  some  of  the  deep  things  of  God,  which,  if  you  be  like  the 
rest  of  this  evil  generation,  you  will  reject  with  indignation. 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  109 

or  receive  with  disrelish,  as  not  being  profitable  to  simple  and 
plain  people  ;  that  is,  to  serfs  and  bondsmen  of  the  law,  idiots 
and  babes  in  the  gospel.  But  if  you  be  men,  free  men,  like 
your  fathers,  and  are  to  be  honoured  of  God,  like  your  fathers, 
to  upbear  His  falling  ark ;  or  if  you  be  like  the  primitive 
churches,  to  whom  Paul  and  the  apostles  wrote  their  epistles, 
wherein  they  speak  continually  of  these  things ;  or,  finally, 
if  you  have  any  fellowship  with  the  Lord,  who  offered  that 
intercessory  prayer  of  which  our  text  is  a  part,  you  will  wel- 
come with  great  gladness  these  hints  of  higher  and  deeper 
discourse,  and  pray  for  me  diligently,  that  I  may  be  able  to 
clear  the  foundations  of  the  house  from  that  rank  growth  of 
Arminianism  and  Socinianism  which  have  obscured  their 
massive  strength  and  brilliant  beauty.  For  we  do  live,  or 
rather  creep  about,  amongst  the  ruins  of  a  great  and  majestic 
city,  where  one  cradleth  himself  in  some  cave  amongst  the 
ruins,  and  another  hath  a  cottage  stuck  up  against  some 
massy  column,  and  others  take  refuge  beneath  the  branches 
which  grow  out  of  a  ruinous  wall.  That  city  is  the  majestic 
system  of  divine  theology,  which  our  fathers  built  up,  and 
defended  with  great  and  goodly  bulwarks  against  the  roam- 
ing and  marauding  tribes  of  early  heretics,  the  light-minded 
and  thoughtless  banditti  of  Arius,  and  the  massive  legions  of 
apostate  Rome :  of  which  system,  brethren,  I  read  the  out- 
line in  our  Reformers'  Confession  of  Faith  last  Wednesday 
night,  in  the  hearing  of  you  all.  Permit  me — nay,  whether 
permitted  or  not,  I  will  preach  the  whole  compass  of  that 
doctrine,  to  which  I  solemnly  set  my  hand  and  subscribed 
my  name  that  it  was  my  faith,  and  should  be  the  substance 
of  my  preaching. 

And  I  do  entreat  you,  my  brethren  and  my  people,  to  con- 
sider that  word  which  was  spoken  by  the  Lord  :  "  This  is  life 
eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."  Know  God  then,  and 
know  Jesus  Christ.  Think  not  that  holiness,  think  not  that 
life  eternal,  is  otherwise  to  be  obtained  than  in  the  attainment 
of  such  knowledge.  For  what  end  hath  God  revealed  Him- 
self, but  to  be  known,  to  be  reverently  inquired  into,  and  faith- 
fully accepted  of  all  His  holy  ones  ?     And  know  this  day  your 


no  THE  INCARNATION: 

standing,  that  it  is  either  in  the  decree  of  God,  as  chosen  in 
Jesus  Christ  ;  or  it  is  in  nature,  fallen  and  unable  to  rise  again. 
If  you  are  thinking  to  stand  in  your  creature  strength,  or 
otherwise  than  by  the  strength  of  God's  decree,  you  shall  fall 
and  fall,  and  err  and  err,  unto  the  end.  But  if  you  will  believe 
this  day,  and  behold  your  weakness  and  sinfulness — the  weak- 
ness and  sinfulness  of  every  creature,  save  as  it  standeth  in 
the  decree  and  purpose  of  God — then  blessed  are  ye  ;  for  ye 
will  seek  unto  the  Lord  by  faith,  and  humble  yourselves  before 
Him  by  many  prayers,  and  seek  to  know  and  do  His  will,  and 
to  hang  upon  it  continually  ;  and  by  the  grace  manifested  in 
Jesus  Christ  you  will  surely  be  brought  out  of  nature's  stand- 
ing, into  the  standing  of  the  eternal  decree,  whose  love  and 
mercy  and  grace  the  Lord  Jesus  did  open  unto  all  who  truly 
repent  and  unfeignedly  believe  the  gospel.  But  reject  the 
decree,  and  you  reject  your  salvation,  which  can  only  come 
by  receiving  the  decree.  Therefore,  the  Lord  grant  as  many 
as  doubt  to  doubt  no  longer,  and  as  many  as  believe  to  grow 
in  faith  and  righteousness,  to  the  praise  of  His  glory. 

This  our  darkness  and  stumbling  cometh  out  of  ignorance 
of  the  Scriptures,  which  in  the  Protestant  Church  was  never 
so  great,  I  believe,  as  it  is  at  this  moment :  and  hence  that 
impatience  of  every  inquiry  into  the  deep  things  of  the  mys- 
teries of  God.  The  Methodistical  and  Evangelical  spirit, 
which  is  now  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church,  disfavours  ex- 
ceedingly all  research  into  Divine  truth,  all  controversy  for 
orthodox  doctrine,  and  all  abjuration  of  heresy  and  schism  ; 
being  content  with  a  certain  loose  persuasion,  immature  know- 
ledge, and  latitudinarian  indifference,  which  they  misname 
Charity  (but  its  true  name  is  Liberality.)  Now,  brethren,  I 
am  convinced  in  my  mind,  that  till  we  return  to  the  spirit  of 
the  Reformation,  and  become  patient  of  thought,  and  patient 
of  hearing  thought  expressed,  and  patient  of  discerning  be- 
tween the  evil  and  the  good,  we  never  shall  escape  out  of  the 
region  of  frames  and  feelings  and  perpetual  fluctuations  of 
spirit,  into  the  region  of  rooted  and  grounded  faith,  assured 
hope,  and  fervent  charity.  I  would  rather  the  pulpit  were 
dumb,  than  that  it  should  minister  excitement  to  mere  natural 


ITS  END  THE  GLOR  V  OF  GOD.  1 1 1 

feelings,  to  the  same  parts  of  our  nature  to  which  the  play- 
house and  the  opera  do  administer :  but  this  is  the  state  to 
which  it  is  fast  coming,  in  a  good  measure  through  the  ignor- 
ance of  the  people  to  whom  we  speak. 

And,  brethren,  if  you  will  not  during  the  week  meditate  and 
reflect  upon  those  things  which  during  the  Sabbath  I  minister, 
the  ministry  will  fail  to  be  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof, 
for  correction,  and  for  instruction  in  righteousness.  Where- 
fore, I  earnestly  entreat  you  to  meditate  the  word  of  God, 
with  all  prayer  and  supplication  of  the  Spirit,  who  leadeth 
into  all  truth ;  and  so  let  us  exercise  ourselves  together  to 
search  into  the  great  ends  of  God's  glory  which  were  accom- 
plished by  the  incarnation  of  His  Son  ;  than  which  no  other 
exercise  of  soul  can  be  more  profitable  to  prepare  us  for 
entering  within  the  veil  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Fall,  and 
witnessing  the  glory  of  God  which  is  manifested  therein. 
Sure  I  am,  beloved  in  the  Lord,  that  according  to  our  patient 
travail  in  meditation  and  prayer,  in  faith  and  knowledge,  will 
be  our  progress  in  grace,  in  wisdom,  in  righteousness,  and 
truth,  in  humility  and  steadfastness,  in  consolation  and  assur- 
ance ;  which  are  blessed  conditions  of  the  soul,  not  otherwise 
to  be  attained,  nor  otherwise  to  be  preserved,  save  in  the  wor- 
ship and  the  service  of  God  with  all  the  heart,  with  all  the 
mind,  with  all  the  soul,  and  with  all  the  strength.  Be  ye 
therefore  exhorted,  dearly-beloved  brethren,  to  increase  in 
all  knowledge  and  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding  :  and 
may  the  Spirit  open  the  eyes  of  your  mind,  and  enlighten 
your  understanding,  that  you  may  be  able  to  know  what  is 
the  hope  of  His  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of 
His  inheritance  in  the  saints  !  For  we  are  called,  every  one 
of  us,  to  do  the  same  offices  for  the  glory  of  God  which  Christ 
did.  Yea,  all  this  which  I  have  set  forth  to  you  concerning 
the  Son  of  man,  I  might  now  turn  and  apply  to  every  one  of 
you,  who  have  been  engrafted  into  Him  by  baptism  to  be  par- 
takers of  His  justice,  and  through  faith  have  received  the  gift 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  that  in  you,  yea,  in  every  one  of  you, 
God  is  to  be  glorified,  as  He  was  glorified  in  the  Son  of  man. 
In  you,  the  honour  and  glory  of  the  eternal  Trinity  is  to  be 


1 1 2  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

shewn  forth  :  the  Father,  in  your  doing  His  will,  and  not  the 
will  of  the  flesh  or  the  will  of  man  ;  the  Son,  by  your  growing 
up  into  closer  and  closer  union  with  Him,  and  shewing  forth 
the  express  image  of  His  person  ;  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the 
spirit  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind,  in  which 
you  work  the  work  of  God  and  hold  forth  the  image  of 
Christ.  For  to  this  end  Christ  emptied  Himself  of,  or  humbled 
the  Divinity  into  manhood,  that  He  might  become  the  very 
type  or  pattern  of  every  Christian  who  should  come  after,  and 
of  us,  dear  brethren,  though  born  in  a  far  distant  age,  and 
amongst  a  cold,  indifferent  generation.  In  us,  by  our  triumph- 
ing over  sin,  is  the  glory  of  the  holiness  of  God  also  to  be 
shewn  forth  :  yea,  and  I  may  say  in  a  somewhat  more  re- 
markable manner,  forasmuch  as  sin  hath  already  the  posses- 
sion of  our  mortal  members,  which  have  heretofore  been  the 
servants  of  sin,  but  are  now  become  the  servants  of  righteous- 
ness. Wherein  also  is  magnified  the  almighty  power  of  God, 
who  by  the  Holy  Spirit  can  work  righteousness  in  these  taber- 
nacles of  corruption,  and  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean; 
beget  the  child  of  Christ  in  the  dead  womb  of  nature,  and 
raise  up  children  of  Abraham's  faith  from  the  very  stones. 
Whatever,  therefore,  the  Son  of  man  did  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh  to  honour  and  glorify  God,  He  expecteth  us  to  continue 
and  carry  forward  until  He  come  again.  Yea,  not  only  ex- 
pecteth it,  but  hath  provided  us  with  the  power  to  fulfil 
it ;  which  is  our  baptismal  gift,  when  we  become  partakers 
of  all  the  benefits  of  the  new  covenant,  and  enter  into 
engagements  to  be  wholly  the  Lord's.  Wherefore,  as  the 
apostle  Paul  did  exhort  Timothy  to  stir  up  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  which  was  in  him  by  the  laying  on  of  the 
hands  of  the  presbytery,  so  do  I  call  upon  every  one  of  you, 
by  faith,  fervent  prayer,  and  willing  obedience,  to  stir  up  the 
gift  that  is  in  you  by  baptism.  For  which  reason  we  should 
arise  to  the  work  of  doing  the  will  of  Him  who  hath  sent  us, 
even  as  Christ  did  when  He  was  baptized  by  John;  fearing 
nothing,  dearly  beloved,  doubting  nothing,  but  surely  believ- 
ing that  He  who  hath  called  us  will  also  justify  us,  will  also 
sanctify  us,  will  also  glorify  us.  And  if  He  glorify  us,  then 
will  He  first  glorify  Himself  in  us,  by  making  us  serviceable 


ITS  END  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD.  113 

to  the  manifestation  of  His  glory  in  the  midst  of  a  wicked 
generation.  Wherefore  I  entreat  you  again  to  stir  up  the 
gift  that  is  in  you  by  baptism  ;  to  stir  it  up  by  faith,  fervent 
prayer,  and  willing  obedience.     Amen. 


VOL.  V,  H 


III. 

THE  METHOD  IS  BY  TAKING  UP  THE  FALLEN  HUMANITY. 

Luke  i.  35. 

And  the  angel  attswered  and  said  tmto  her,  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee, 
and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee :  therefore  also  that  holy 
thing,  -which  shall  be  born  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Soft  of  God. 

ILTAVING  opened,  in  the  two  foregoing  discourses,  the 
origin  of  the  incarnation,  in  the  will  of  God,  and  the 
end  of  it,  for  the  glory  of  God,  we  do  now  proceed  to  treat  of 
the  scheme  or  method  of  it,  in  the  purpose  of  God, — concern- 
ing which,  though  we  have  frequently  spoken  already,  we 
have  not  yet  given  it  that  large  and  sufficient  demonstration 
which  is  needful  in  a  matter  of  such  vast  importance  to  the 
glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men. 

This  seemeth  to  me  the  logical  way  of  handling  any  act  of 
the  Godhead :  first,  to  shew  wherein  it  originates ;  then, 
whereto  it  tendeth ;  then,  by  what  method  it  proceedeth ; 
then,  in  what  way  it  is  transacted ;  and,  finally,  with  what 
fruits  or  effects  it  is  followed.  The  third  of  these  steps,  in 
the  exposition  of  our  great  subject,  we  do  now  proceed  to 
take,  trusting  in  the  help  of  God.  And  to  the  end  of  open- 
ing with  due  order  the  method  which  God  hath  taken  to  bring 
about  the  incarnation  of  His  Son,  we  shall  first  treat  of  the 
composition  of  His  Divine  person,  from  His  conception  even 
unto  His  resurrection,  observing  the  most  notable  changes 
which  He  underwent  during  that  period  :  for  with  the  resur- 
rection I  regard  my  present  subject  to  conclude.  It  is  only 
Christ  in  the  flesh  concerning  which  I  have  undertaken  to  dis- 
course :  the  discourse  of  Christ  from  the  resurrection  onward 
belongeth  properly  to  another  subject,  which  is  the  Church, 
whereof  by  His  ascension  into  glory  He  became  the  Head. 


BY  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         115 

After  taking  this  view  of  the  composition,  and  the  successive 
changes  which  passed  upon  Christ's  person  until  the  resur- 
rection, I  shall  proceed  to  open,  in  the  second  part  of  this 
sermon,  how  God,  by  uniting  the  person  of  His  Son  to  fallen 
flesh,  doth  thereby  reconcile  the  whole  lump  of  fallen  huma- 
nity unto  Himself,  and  is  enabled,  through  Christ,  to  save  as 
many  as  it  pleaseth  Him,  without  any  detriment  unto,  but 
rather  with  all  illustration  of,  His  righteousness  and  holiness. 
This  will  lead  us  to  speak  of  the  universality  of  the  reconcilia- 
tion and  the  individuality  of  the  election  ;  and  to  shew  how 
harmonious  and  mutually  co-operating  are  these  two  great 
truths.  From  this  we  shall  pass,  in  the  third  part,  to  shew 
how,  by  this  same  method  of  sending  His  Son  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  flesh,  God  doth  remove  the  law,  which  is  the  form  of 
the  enmity,  and  bring  in  unto  all  the  world  this  dispensation 
of  grace  under  which  we  now  stand.  After  which  we  shall 
conclude  this  discourse  upon  the  method  of  the  incarnation 
with  practical  conclusions  and  improvements  of  the  whole. 


PART  I. 

With  all  due  reverence,  therefore,  and  trust  in  Divine  assist- 
ance, we  do  now  proceed  to  open  the  scheme  which  God  had 
purposed  in  Himself  for  bringing  about  this  most  important 
event  in  creation's  history,  that  the  Son  of  God,  by  and  for 
whom  all  things  were  created  and  do  consist,  should  join  Him- 
self unto  the  fallen  creation,  and  take  up  into  His  own  eternal 
personality  the  human  nature,  after  it  had  fallen,  and  become 
obnoxious  to  all  the  powers  of  sin  and  infirmity  and  rebellion  ; 
in  order  that  God  might  be  shewn  to  be  greater  and  mightier 
far  than  the  creatures  combined  in  the  confederacy  of  sin 
against  the  Creator  ;  and  that  the  state  of  fallen  sinful  crea- 
tion, which  God  had  permitted  to  come  to  pass,  might  yield 
forth  from  its  impure  and  unholy  womb  the  most  perfect,  the 
most  holy,  the  most  wonderful  Son  of  God,  to  be  the  head 
and  support,  the  life,  the  mover,  and  the  guide  of  all  creation, 
redeemed  in  the  redemption  of  that  creature  substance  which 
He  assumed  unto  Himself    That  Christ  took  our  fallen  nature 


1 1 6       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

is  most  manifest,  because  there  was  no  other  in  existence  to 
take.     The  fine  gold  of  Adam's  being  was  changed,  and  the 
divine  goodness  of  his  will  was  oppressed  by  the  mastery 
of  sin  :  so  that,  unless  God  had  created  the  Virgin  in  Adam's 
first  estate,  (which  is  a  figment  of  Romish  superstition,)  it  was 
impossible  to  find  in  existence  any  human  nature  but  human 
nature  fallen,  whereof  Christ  might  partake  with  the  brethren. 
I  believe,  therefore,  in  opposition  to  all  fantastics,  schisma- 
tics, and  sectarians  who  say  the  contrary,  that  Christ  took 
unto  Himself  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable  soul ;  and  that 
the  flesh  of  Christ,  like  my  flesh,  was  in  its  proper  nature 
mortal  and  corruptible  ;  that  He  was  of  the  seed  of  David  ; 
that  He  was  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  as  well  as  of  the  seed  of 
the  woman  ;  yea,  that  He  was  of  the  seed  of  the  woman  after 
she  fell,  and  not  before  she  fell.     Even  the  time  for  making 
known  the  truth  that  Christ  in  human  nature  was  to  come, 
did  not  arrive  till  after  the  fall,  because  it  was  determined  in 
the  counsel  of  God  that  He  who  was  to  come  should  come  in 
the  fallen  state  of  the  creature,  and  therein  be  cut  off — yet 
not  for  Himself — to  the  end  it  might  be  proved  that  the  crea- 
ture substance  which   He  took,  and  for  ever  united  to  the 
Godhead,   was  not  of  the  Godhead  a  part,  though  by  the 
Godhead  sustained.     If  He  had  come  in  the  unfallen  man- 
hood, as  these  dreamers  say,  and  had  not  truly  been  subject 
unto  death,  but,  for  some  lesser  end  and  minor  object,  and  as 
it  were  by-intent,  had  laid  aside  the  mantle  of  the  flesh  for  a 
season,  who  would  have  been  able  to  say  that  the  manhood 
of  Christ  had  not  become  deified — that  is,  become  a  part  of 
the  Godhead  .-*     And  if  so,  then  not  only  He,  but  all  His 
members  likewise,  who  are  to  be  brought  into  the  very  self- 
same estate  with  Himself,  must  also  be  deified,  or  pass  into 
the  Godhead  ;  the  creature  become  an  object  of  worship  ;  the 
Creator  be  mingled  with  the  creature ;  the  doctrine  of  God 
the  soul  of  the  world  brought  in,  and   all  the  other   most 
wicked  tenets  of  the  Eastern  superstitions  of  the  earth  intro- 
duced, in  the  room  of  the  most  fruitful,  most  holy  mystery  of 
a  personal  God,  separate  from  the  creature,  yet  supporting 
the  creature  by  eternal  union  with,  though  in  perfect  distinct- 
ness from.  Himself,  in  the  person  of  the  Son,  and  through 


B  V  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         1 1 7 

the  indwelling  of  the  Divine  nature  in  the  person  of  the  Holy- 
Ghost  ;  to  the  end  of  worshipping  the  invisible  Godhead  of 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  remaining  hidden,  and  for  ever 
to  remain  hidden,  in  the  person  of  the  Father.  I  say,  and 
fearlessly  assert,  and  undertake  to  prove,  that  this  great  result 
and  consummation  of  the  Divine  scheme  could  not  otherwise 
be  attained  than  by  the  fall  of  the  creature,  in  order  to  reveal 
its  non-divinity,  or  prove  its  creatureship  ;  so  that,  when  the 
Son  of  God  should  come  to  take  it  unto  Himself,  it  might, 
by  the  very  act  of  dying,  shew  itself,  though  of  Him,  not  to 
be  the  very  God  ;  and  when,  taken  up  into  that  surpassing 
glory  with  which  it  is  now  crowned,  it  might  be  for  ever 
known  to  be  not  human  nature  deified,  but  human  nature 
uplifted  and  upheld  by  God.  The  fall  of  all  creation,  spiritual 
and  material,  was  but  a  step  unto  the  death  of  the  body  of 
Christ ;  even  as  the  creation  of  all  things  visible  and  invisible 
was  only  a  step  to  the  creation  of  that  body.  It  was  because 
the  Lamb  slain,  as  well  as  the  God  manifested,  was  a  part  of 
the  Divine  purpose,  that  death  came  into  the  world.  Death 
knew  not  Avhat  death  meant,  until  Christ  died ;  then  the 
mystery  of  death  was  unfolded  unto  itself.  If  the  meaning 
of  a  fall  is  ever  to  be  understood,  it  must  be  studied  in 
the  cross  and  tomb  of  Christ.  For  if  Christ  had  stepped 
at  once  out  of  the  infinite  and  invisible  into  resurrection 
power  and  glory,  and  without  dying  drawn  up  the  creatures 
into  union  with  the  same,  the  creature  would  have  worshipped 
itself,  so  clothed  with  might,  adorned  with  beauty,  and  with 
stability  invested  ;  instead  of  worshipping  the  invisible  God 
of  heaven,  out  of  the  creature,  yet  supporting  the  creature 
and  inhabiting  the  creature ;  therefore  the  object  of  the  crea- 
ture's dependence,  and  the  subject  of  the  creature's  blessed- 
ness :  but  yet  essentially  separate  from  and  advanced  above 
the  creature's  noblest  state,  and  therefore  properly  the  object 
of  the  creature's  continual  worship.  And  this  is  the  first 
point  in  the  mystery  of  Christ's  constitution.  His  taking  the 
substance  of  the  fallen  Virgin  Mary. 

And  now,  with  respect  to  the  human  soul  of  Christ  I  have 
next  to  speak.  That  Christ  had  a  reasonable  soul,  as  well 
as  a  true  body,  is  a  doctrine  most  necessary  to  be  believed ; 


1 1 8       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

because,  otherwise,  He  were  not  a  man,  but  only  the  appari- 
tion of  a  man ;  a  superior  being,  who  for  a  certain  end  and 
purpose  had  clothed  himself  with  human  form — as  was  often 
done  before  in  manifestations  to  the  Patriarchs  and  the  Pro- 
phets— which  is  the  fountain  of  Arianism  with  all  its  poisoned 
streams.  Besides,  if  Christ  had  not  a  reasonable  soul,  His 
human  feelings  and  affections  were  but  an  assumed  fiction  to 
carry  the  end  which  His  mission  had  in  view  ;  and  His  suffer- 
ings and  His  death  were  a  phantasmagoria  played  off  before 
the  eyes  of  men,  but  by  no  means  entering  into  the  vitals  of 
human  sympathy,  nor  proceeding  from  the  communion  and 
love  of  human  kind,  nor  answering  any  end  of  comforting 
human  suffering,  and  interceding  for  human  weakness,  and 
bringing  up  again  the  fallen  creature  to  stand  before  the 
throne  of  the  grace  of  God :  it  is  all  but  a  phantasm  and 
apparition,  like  that  which  appeared  unto  Manoah  and  his 
wife,  and  transacted  wonderful  things  in  their  presence.  This 
was  the  source  of  the  Gnostic  errors  in  the  first  ages  of  the 
church.  Moreover,  and  most  of  all,  if  Christ  had  not  pos- 
sessed a  reasonable  soul,  as  well  as  a  mortal  and  corruptible 
body,  (which  yet  saw  not  corruption,  by  the  Father's  special 
grace,)  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ  must  have  been  separated 
and  divorced  from  His  human  nature  during  the  time  it  hung 
dead  upon  the  cross  and  lay  buried  in  the  tomb.  If  there 
had  been  but  two  principles,  a  body,  and  the  eternal  person 
of  the  Son,  united  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  then,  when  the  body 
of  Christ  lay  in  the  tomb,  the  Divinity  must  have  been  sepa- 
rated from  the  humanity ;  and  this,  though  only  for  an  in- 
stant suffered,  would  upset  the  whole  constitution  of  God  in 
Christ.  For  if  once  the  Creator  and  the  creature  part  of 
Christ,  if  once  the  Divine  and  human  natures,  have  been 
parted,  they  may  be  parted  again ;  and  where  then  were  the 
assurance  of  creation's  stability  in  the  Christ  constitution  for 
ever  and  ever }  Essential  it  is  to  the  purpose  of  God,  that 
when  the  nature  of  the  Godhead  in  the  person  of  the  Son 
had  joined  itself  to  the  creature  in  the  substance  of  man- 
hood, that  hypostatical  union  of  two  distinct  natures  in  one 
person  should  be  established  for  ever  and  ever.  Clearly, 
therefore,  doth   it   remain,    that   there   must   be   a   part   of 


BY  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         119 

human  nature  capable  of  subsisting  separate  from  the  body, 
which,  when  the  body  fell  into  the  curse  of  death,  might 
maintain  the  continuity  of  co-existence  with  the  Godhead 
of  the  Son,  until  the  time  came  for  the  Father  to  send 
the  Holy  Spirit. into  His  mortal  and  corruptible  body,  and 
unite  it  in  a  glorified  state  unto  the  Godhead  of  the  Son  ; 
which  hath  the  while  preserved  its  creature -condition  in 
connexion  with  the  separate  soul.  And  as  I  said  above, 
that  the  fall  is  to  be  understood  by  meditating  that  for 
which  it  came  to  pass — to  wit,  the  dead  body  of  the  Lamb 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  even  so  say  I  now, 
that  the  twofold  nature  of  man,  soul  and  body,  invisible  and 
visible,  is  both  to  be  best  understood,  and  most  surely  be- 
lieved, by  meditating  upon  the  same  great  key  of  creation — 
to  wit,  the  divinity  of  the  Son  subsisting  in  hypostatical  union 
with  the  invisible  soul  of  the  man,  while  the  visible  body  of 
the  man  was  lying  uninformed  with  any  conservative  or  vital 
principle,  truly  dead,  truly  corruptible,  but  not  to  corrupt, 
until  it  pleased  the  Father  to  raise  it,  in  reward  of  Christ's 
faith  and  strong  cryings,  with  supplications  and  tears,  that  He 
might  be  delivered  from  death ;  wherein,  because  of  His  piety, 
He  was  heard.  Yea,  more  :  this  is  to  me  the  great  assurance 
of  a  spiritual  world  of  separate  souls  in  life,  though  invisible 
at  this  time,  and  in  all  times  since  death  began  his  work;  and 
it  is  to  me  the  defeat  of  all  those  fantastics  who  dote  and 
dream  concerning  the  sleep  of  the  soul  from  death  unto  the 
resurrection ;  and,  moreover,  of  that  more  common,  but  at 
the  bottom  not  less  pernicious,  opinion,  that  the  soul  receiveth 
upon  its  being  disembodied  some  aerial  vehicle,  some  house 
of  habitation,  some  tabernacle  of  very  subtile  matter,  wherein 
to  act  and  to  discourse  over  God's  creation :  which  I  hold  to 
be  no  better  than  refined  and  disguised  materialism  :  making 
void  a  spiritual  world,  and  also  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  coming 
with  glory,  in  visible,  sensible  humanity,  to  reign  with  His 
saints,  in  the  like  humanity,  over  a  purified  kingdom  of  flesh 
and  blood.  Moreover,  I  can  see  how,  for  these  great  ends  of 
putting  to  silence  such  manifold  fanciful  and  heretical  notions, 
it  should  have  been  so  distinctly  declared,  and  so  prominently 
brought  forward  in  the  Apostles'  Creed,  that  the  action  of 


1 20       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD  : 

His  incarnation  did  not  terminate  at  His  death;  but  that  He 
descended  into  the  place  of  separate  spirits,  and  did  a  work 
therein — concerning  which  I  do  not  now  enter,  but  only 
recognise  it  as  a  great  head  of  doctrine,  by  means  of  which 
those  doters  concerning  the  sleep  of  the  soul,  and  the  new 
clothing  of  the  soul  during  its  separate  estate,  are  to  be 
bafflqd  and  befooled. 

Now,  concerning  the  time  and  manner  of  our  Lord's  re- 
ceiving this  reasonable  soul,  I  believe  it  to  have  been  at  the 
same  time,  and  after  the  same  manner,  in  which  the  rest  of 
the  children  receive  it ;  in  opposition  to  those  who  hold  the 
pre-existence  of  Christ's  human  soul,  or  that  it  was  made 
before  the  creatures,  for  the  Son  of  God  to  possess  and  unite 
Himself  to,  and  with  it  and  by  it  to  create  all  things  visible 
and  invisible,  and  afterwards  to  come  in  it  and  join  Himself 
to  the  substance  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  I  hold,  with  the  ortho- 
dox Church,  that  this  is  a  pestilent  error,  which  hath  its 
origin  in  the  confounding  of  a  divine  purpose  with  a  divine 
act,  and  endeth  in  various  evil  consequences,  which  I  shall 
in  a  few  words  expose.  With  respect  to  its  origin :  That 
the  Creator  had  Himself,  and  His  own  appearing  in  crea- 
ture form,  fully  and  mainly  in  His  eye  from  the  first  be- 
ginning, and  through  the  several  actings  of  creation,  there 
is,  and  can  be  no  question,  among  those  who  meditate 
such  matters,  or  read  the  Holy  Scriptures — for  example, 
the  first  chapter  of  Colossians,  the  first  chapter  of  He- 
bre\ys,  and  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Proverbs.  Everything 
that  hath  been  done  by  God  out  of  Himself,  was  done  in  the 
contemplation  and  to  the  end  of  Himself  becoming  unto 
creatures  manifest  in  creature  form  ;  and  that  creature  form 
was  the  form  of  risen  God-manhood.  But  to  suppose  that  to 
the  effecting  of  this  purpose  it  was  necessary  that  the  Creator 
should  first  create  a  human  soul,  in  which  and  by  which  to 
create  all  things,  is  a  gratuitous  hypothesis  to  represent  a 
purpose  by  an  act,  and  to  destroy  altogether  the  beauty, 
harmony,  and  order  of  the  Divine  idea,  developing  itself  by 
slow  and  sure  progression,  and  at  length  manifesting  itself  in 
the  birth  of  Immanuel  the  Virgin's  Son.  Moreover,  if  the 
human  soul  of  Christ  was  thus  before  creation  hypostatically 


B V  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         1 2 1 

united  with  the  Divinity  of  the  Son,  we  have  an  in-spiritual 
before  we  have  an  in-carnate  God  ;  we  have  God  in  union 
with  spiritual  creation  subsisting,  and  therefore  unto  spiritual 
creatures  manifest,  before  we  have  God  in  union  with  flesh 
subsisting  :  now  this  is  to  destroy  the  whole  tenor  of  the 
Scriptures  and  scheme  of  God,  which  represent  the  angels 
and  all  creation  hanging  upon  the  lips  of  promise,  and  look- 
ing with  faith  unto  the  symbols  of  the  Man  about  to  be,  and 
travailing  with  hope  until  the  great  end  of  all  things  should 
appear.  Besides,  it  wholly  destroys  the  continuity  of  things, 
and  casts  them  back  again  upon  themselves,  to  say  that  a 
soul  which  had  known  and  effected  the  creation  should  pass 
into  infantine  ignorance  and  childhood  simplicity,  and  ascend 
through  all  the  stages  of  a  human  life.  Moreover,  then  cre- 
ation hath  not  fallen  wholly,  for  this  pre-existent  soul  hath 
never  found  a  fall ;  and,  being  united  with  the  body  of  Christ, 
is  still  the  creature  in  the  unfallen  state  ;  and  so  the  better 
half  of  the  man  Christ  is  unfallen,  and  the  other  half  of  Him 
is  fallen.  Strange  conjunction  !  and  heterogeneous  mixture  ! 
Believing,  therefore,  and  holding  it  to  be  a  point  of  great  im- 
portance to  believe,  that  the  human  soul  of  Christ  came  unto 
Him  just  as  the  human  soul  of  another  man,  we  proceed  a 
little  further  to  open  the  nature  of  the  person  thus  constituted. 
God  at  first,  when  He  had  created  man,  breathed  into  his 
nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  he  became  a  living  soul.  Such 
a  living  soul  is,  therefore,  the  definition  of  man  :  "  The  first 
Adam  was  made  a  living  soul."  Again,  it  is  said,  "  The  body 
returneth  unto  the  dust,  and  the  soul  to  him  that  gave  it." 
Man,  therefore,  is  a  body  of  dust  and  a  soul  given  by  God, 
in  a  state  of  living  union.  Man  is  not  a  body  of  flesh,  nor  is 
man  a  disembodied  soul ;  but  these  two  in  living  union  con- 
stitute a  man.  From  the  time  that  Christ  was  conceived  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  was  He  both  body 
and  soul  of  man.  He  was  not  soul  of  man  before  He  was 
body  of  man  ;  but  He  was  soul  and  body  of  man  from  the 
same  moment  of  His  conception.  From  which  moment  also 
the  Holy  Ghost  abode  in  Him  and  sanctified  Him  ;  so  that 
He  was  in  very  deed  a  holy  thing  from  the  beginning  of  His 
creature  being  :  which  distinctly  to  understand  it  is  necessary 


122       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD : 

to  have  clear  views  of  the  Divine  purpose,  as  it  is  contained 
in  these  words,  "  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and 
the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee :  therefore 
also  that  holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  of  thee  shall  be  called 
the  Son  of  God."  In  these  words  we  have  all  the  direct  infor- 
mation which  Scripture  afifordeth  concerning  this  great  act  of 
God,  which  was  the  end  of  all  the  promises  of  God  from  the 
fall  onwards ;  and  we  are  told  that  it  was  an  act  done  by  the 
Highest  in  the  person  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now  every  act  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  an  act  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  from 
whom  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth.  The  Holy  Ghost  worketh 
nothing  of  Himself,  but  worketh  the  common  pleasure  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son.  In  the  creation,  therefore,  of  this  body 
of  Christ  of  the  woman's  substance,  there  is  an  act  of  the 
Father's  will  and  a  word  of  the  Son  assenting  thereto.  The 
word  of  the  Son  is  given  unto  us  by  St  Paul  in  the  tenth  of 
the  Hebrews:  "  A  body  hast  thou  prepared  for  me.  .  .  . 
Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  ;  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  writ- 
ten of  me,  to  do  thy  will,  O  God."  In  which  words  are  con- 
tained both  the  will  of  the  Father,  that  it  should  be  so  done  ; 
and  the  word  of  Christ  consenting  so  to  do.  And  what  is  the 
thing  thus  willed  of  the  Father  and  assented  to  of  the  Son  .'' 
It  is,  that  He  should  take  the  body  which  the  Father  would 
prepare  for  Him.  This  was  the  covenant  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son :  this  was  the  purpose  in  the  Christ :  the  Father 
willing  it  out  of  very  goodness,  that  He  might  manifest  Him- 
self unto  creatures  which  were  to  be  made,  and  support  the 
creation  in  blessedness  for  ever ;  the  Son  consenting  to  it  out 
of  very  dutifulness  unto  His  Father,  together  with  the  same 
goodness  unto  the  creature  ;  and  thus  the  covenant  between 
the  Father  and  the  Son  being  willed  and  worded,  the  Holy 
Ghost,  of  very  delight  in  the  communion  of  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  to  execute  what  their  pleasure  is,  and  likewise  of 
very  goodness  to  the  creature,  consented  to  prepare  that  body, 
so  willed  and  so  worded  by  the  Godhead.  And  with  this 
view,  of  preparing  a  body  for  the  Son  of  God  and  acting  forth 
the  eternal  covenant,  the  Holy  Ghost  created  all  things  out 
of  nothing,  and  began  as  it  were  the  collecting  of  materials, 
and  the  putting  together  of  scaffoldings,  for  the  construction 


BY  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         123 

of  that  body  in  which,  as  in  a  holy  temple,  Godhead  should 
abide,  and  shew  itself  for  ever  ;  and  by  which,  as  the  great 
head  of  intelligence,  heart  of  love,  and  right  hand  of  power, 
the  Godhead  should  for  ever  perform  the  pleasure  of  its  will, 
and  bring  forth  the  harmony  of  its  purpose.  And  now,  when 
a  spiritual  world  had  been  created,  and  by  its  fall  demonstra- 
ted that  it  was  not  an  end  in  itself ;  and  when  a  visible  world 
had  been  superadded  thereunto,  and  by  its  fall  shewn  that 
neither  was  this  the  end  of  the  purpose ;  the  fulness  of  the 
time  being  come,  forth  proceedeth  the  Holy  Ghost  to  lay  the 
foundation-stone  of  that  temple  of  the  Divinity,  to  bring  into 
being  that  right-hand  Man  of  God,  to  form  that  body  (bone 
of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh)  which  had  been  the  great 
end  of  God  in  coming  forth  at  all  by  creation  to  give  existence 
beside  Himself  And  the  instant  that  act  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
began,  in  the  very  beginning  of  it,  in  the  instant  of  life  quick- 
ened before  the  sight  of  God,  did  the  Son,  in  His  independent 
personality,  once  and  for  ever  join  Himself  to  the  holy  thing, 
which  by  that  conjunction  became  properly  named  the  Son 
of  God.  And  such  I  conceive  to  be  the  mystery  of  this  con- 
ception of  the  Child  whose  name  is  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Prince  of  Peace. 
And  as  His  conception  was,  such  also  was  His  life ;  His 
constitution  never  changing ;  being  in  the  embryo  what  it  was 
in  the  man  of  stature  ;  being  in  the  humiliation  what  it  was 
in  the  exaltation,  what  it  is  now,  and  what  it  shall  be  for  ever 
and  for  ever.  The  constitution  of  His  being  is  unchangeable  : 
the  development  of  its  power  and  glory  being  the  only  cause 
of  apparent  change.  And  what  is  this  wonderful  constitution 
of  the  Christ  of  God  .''  It  is  the  substance  of  the  Godhead  in 
the  person  of  the  Son,  and  the  substance  of  the  creature  in 
the  state  of  fallen  manhood,  united,  yet  not  mixed,  but  most 
distinct  for  ever.  And  is  this  all  ?  No  :  this  is  not  all.  With 
humility  be  it  spoken,  but  yet  with  truth  and  verity,  that  the 
fallen  humanity  could  not  have  been  sanctified  and  redeemed 
by  the  union  of  the  Son  alone  ;  which  directly  leadeth  unto 
an  inmixing  and  confusing  of  the  Divine  with  the  human  na- 
ture, that  pestilent  heresy  of  Eutyches.  The  human  nature  is 
thoroughly  fallen  ;   and  without  a  thorough  communication, 


124       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

inhabitation,  and  empowering  of  a  Divine  substance,  it  cannot 
again  be  brought  up  pure  and  holy.  The  mere  apprehension 
of  it  by  the  Son  doth  not  make  it  holy.  Such  a  union  leads 
directly  to  the  apotheosis  or  deification  of  the  creature,  and 
this  again  does  away  with  the  mystery  of  a  Trinity  in  the 
Godhead.  Yet  do  I  not  hesitate  to  assert,  that  this  is  the  idea 
of  the  person  of  Christ  generally  set  forth  :  and  the  effect  has 
been  to  withdraw  from  the  eye  of  the  Church  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  incarnation,  which  is  as  truly  the  great  de- 
monstration of  the  Spirit's  power  and  manner  of  working,  as 
the  incarnation  itself  is  of  the  Father's  goodness,  and  the  Son's 
surpassing  love.  This  comes  from  the  omission  of  the  third 
part  in  the  composition  of  Christ,  which  is,  the  substance  of 
the  Godhead  in  the  person  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  to  whose 
Divine  presence  and  power  it  is  that  the  creation  of  the  body 
in  the  womb  of  the  virgin  is  given,  the  mighty  works  which 
Christ  did  ascribed,  and  the  spotlessness  of  His  sacrifice  attri- 
buted, in  the  Holy  Scripture.  The  Holy  Ghost  sanctifying 
and  empoweringthe  manhood  of  Christ  even  from  His  mother's 
womb,  is  the  manifestation  both  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son 
in  His  manhood,  because  the  Holy  Ghost  testifieth  of  the 
Father  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  them  only  :  so  that  in  the  man- 
hood of  Christ  was  exhibited  all  of  the  Godhead  that  shall 
ever  be  exhibited.  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit ;  according  as  it  is 
written,  "  In  Him  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily," 
or  in  a  body.  The  time  was  not  come  for  manifesting  it 
gloriously,  because  the  heat  of  battle  was  then  going  forward, 
when  the  warrior  is  all  soiled  with  sweat,  and  dust,  and  blood. 
He  was  wrestling  with  sin,  in  sin's  own  obscure  dwelling-place; 
against  the  powers  of  darkness,  in  their  dark  abode  :  He  was 
overcoming  sin  in  the  flesh.  And  therefore  was  it  that  He 
appeared  not  in  the  glorious  raiment  of  a  conqueror,  or  in  the 
full  majesty  of  a  possessor,  as  He  shall  appear  when  He  cometh 
the  second  time.  Nevertheless,  He  was  the  person  of  the 
Eternal  Son,  manifesting  forth  the  will  of  the  Father  and  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  the  word  of  the  Son,  in 
manhood,  yea,  in  fallen  manhood.  He  took  up  the  creature 
in  its  lowest  estate,  in  order  to  justify  God  therein,  by  proving 
how  good  even  that  estate  was ;  verily  to  prove  that  it  was 


BY  TA  KING  FALLEN  HUM  A  NIT  Y.         1 2  5 

holy ;  a  part  of  the  scheme  of  Him  whose  name  and  style  is 
Holy,  Holy,  Holy  ;  yea,  moreover,  that  it  was  a  state  of  the 
creature  necessary  for  the  knowledge  of  God,  as  the  God  of 
grace,  mercy,  and  peace.  Christ  in  fallen  manhood  redeemed, 
Christ  as  the  Lamb  slain,  is,  let  me  tell  these  silly  dreamers, 
a  necessary  exhibition  of  the  Godhead,  to  the  end  that  its 
love,  its  grace,  its  pity,  its  compassion,  might  be  known,  as 
well  as  its  goodness  and  might  and  majesty  and  power. 

For  my  own  satisfaction,  and  for  the  satisfaction  of  all  un- 
sophisticated orthodox  members  of  Christ's  Church,  I  should 
conceive  the  foregoing  opening  of  the  subject  to  be  quite  suf- 
-ficient ;  but,  what  with  the  malice  of  Satan,  the  ignorance  of 
men,  and  the  multitude  of  those  who  malign  the  truth  which 
I  preach,  holding  me  for  a  speculator  or  a  fool,  or  even  a 
madman,  I  deem  it  good  to  argue  this  matter  a  little,  in  order 
to  put  to  silence  the  gainsaying  of  foolish  men,  and  to  estab- 
lish the  Church  in  so  fundamental  a  point  of  doctrine.  And 
therefore,  at  the  risk  of  being  thought  tedious  by  the  en- 
lightened and  the  believing,  I  shall  enter  a  little  more  parti- 
cularly into  this  question,  and  endeavour  to  set  the  matter  in 
a  still  fuller  and  clearer  light,  by  opening  those  successive 
anointings  with  the  Holy  Ghost  which  our  Saviour  received, 
those  apparent  changes  through  which  His  humanity  passed, 
before  He  became  High  Priest  in  full  degree,  and  did  receive 
that  glorious  body  which  was  prepared  for  Him  by  the 
Father. 

There  was  this  peculiarity  in  Aaron's  consecration  to  the 
office  of  the  high  priest,  that  he  was  anointed  with  the  holy 
oil  of  consecration  upon  the  head,  which  flowed  down  his 
beard,  and  unto  the  skirts  of  his  garment.  The  rest  of  the 
priests  were  not  thus  anointed,  but  sprinkled  with  a  mixture 
of  blood  and  oil,  as  was  Aaron  also.  But  this  anointing  over 
his  whole  person,  like  his  birthright  and  his  garments,  was 
proper  to  Aaron  as  high  priest ;  and,  being  so,  is  a  point  of 
much  importance  towards  understanding  Christ's  peculiar 
anointing  with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  that  most  holy  oil  of 
consecration  is  everywhere  used  as  the  emblem  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  with  which  Christ  was  anointed  above  measure.     "  I 


1 26       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD  : 

have  found  David  my  servant :  with  my  holy  oil  have  I 
anointed  him,"  (Psalm  Ixxxix.)  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
God  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me."  Now,  of  this 
anointing  there  is  a  threefold  act  to  be  noticed  in  Christ's  life ; 
the  first  being  from  the  time  of  the  existence  of  His  body, — 
indeed,  it  was  this  anointing  with  the  Holy  Ghost  which  gave 
His  body  existence :  "  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon 
thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee ; 
and  the  holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  of  thee  shall  be  called 
the  Son  of  God."  It  was  not  with  Christ,  in  this  respect,  as 
it  was  with  Jeremiah  and  the  Baptist,  who  were  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  mother's  womb  :  He  was  not 
merely  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  the  author  of  His  bodily  life,  the  quickener  of  that 
substance  which  He  took  from  fallen  humanity :  or,  to 
speak  more  correctly,  the  Holy  Ghost  uniting  Himself  for 
ever  to  the  human  soul  of  Jesus,  in  virtue  and  in  conse- 
quence of  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity  having  united 
Himself  thereto,  this  threefold  spiritual  substance,  the  only- 
begotten  Son,  the  human  soul,  and  the  Holy  Spirit — (or 
rather  twofold,  one  of  the  parts  being  twofold  in  itself;  for 
we  may  not  mingle  the  divine  nature  with  the  human  nature, 
nor  may  we  mingle  the  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost  with 
the  personality  of  the  Son) — the  Eternal  Son,  therefore, 
humbling  Himself  to  the  human  soul,  and  the  human  soul 
taken  possession  of  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  this  spiritual  sub- 
stance (of  two  natures  only,  though  of  three  parts)  did  ani- 
mate and  give  life  to  the  flesh  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  which  was 
flesh  in  the  fallen  state,  and  liable  to  all  the  temptations  to 
which  flesh  is  liable  :  but  the  soul  of  Christ,  thus  anointed 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  did  ever  resist  and  reject  the  sugges- 
tions of  evil.  I  wish  it  to  be  clearly  understood — and  this  is 
the  proper  place  for  declaring  it — that  I  believe  it  to  be 
necessary  unto  salvation  that  a  man  should  believe  that 
Christ's  soul  was  so  held  in  possession  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  so  supported  by  the  Divine  nature,  as  that  it  never 
assented  unto  an  evil  suggestion,  and  never  originated  an 
evil  suggestion  :  while,  upon  the  other  hand,  His  flesh  was  of 
that  mortal  and  corruptible  kind  Avhich  is  liable  to  all  forms 


BY  TA  KING  FALLEN  HUM  A  NIT  Y.         127 

of  evil  suggestion  and  temptation,  through  its  participation  in 
a  fallen  nature  and  a  fallen  world  :  and  that  thus,  though  at 
all  points  assailable  through  His  flesh.  He  was  in  all  respects 
holy ;  seeing  wickedness  consisteth  not  in  being  tempted,  but 
in  yielding  to  the  temptation.  This,  I  say,  I  consider  to  be 
an  article  of  faith  necessary  for  salvation :  and  the  opposite 
of  it,  which  holdeth  that  His  flesh  was  unfallen,  and  not 
liable  to  all  temptation  by  sin,  nor  conscious  to  it,  I  hold  to 
be  a  virtual  denial  of  His  humanity ;  a  removal  of  us  from 
the  fellowship  of  His  mediation ;  a  removal  of  Him  from  the 
sympathy  of  our  sufferings  and  temptations  ;  and  a  bringing 
in  of  many  ancient  heresies  which  the  Church  condemned ; 
and,  if  I  err  not,  it  is  the  reappearance  of  that  spirit  of  Anti- 
christ, mentioned  by  St  John  in  these  words,  "  Every  spirit 
that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,  is 
not  of  God."  I  foresee,  moreover,  that  if  some  one  will  not 
stand  boldly  forth  to  bear  the  odium  of  this  point  of  ortho- 
dox faith,  and  to  redargue  the  gainsayers  of  it,  to  such  a 
pitch  of  sickly  sentimentalism  are  we  come,  that  a  confirmed 
system  of  heterodox  doctrine  and  pharisaical  life  will  be  the 
fatal  issue.  For,  is  it  not  a  thing  clear  as  noonday,  that  if 
you  are  ashamed  to  think  the  holy  soul  of  Jesus  should  in- 
habit mortal  and  corruptible  flesh,  which  must  first  be  a  little 
purified  before  the  Divine  glory  will  consent  to  tabernacle  in 
it,  then  you  will  be  also  ashamed,  after  you  have  been  sancti- 
fied of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  confess  the  sinfulness  of  your  own 
flesh,  but  will  think  and  believe,  with  the  Arminians,  that  it 
hath  received  a  purification  .''  and,  thus  purified,  you  will  loathe 
to  mingle  again  with  publicans  and  sinners,  lest  you  should  be 
tainted  anew;  and  you  will  say,  "Stand  off:  I  am  holier  than 
thou,"  While  Christ  carried  about  with  Him  this  mortal  and 
corruptible  body,  which  lay  open  and  assailable  to  the  assaults 
of  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  He  was  able  to  meet 
the  demands  of  the  law,  Thou  shalt  not  do  this,  Thou 
shalt  not  do  that ;  because  He  was  tempted  to  do  it,  and  )^et 
did  it  not.  But  unless  He  had  been  liable  and  obnoxious  to 
do  the  evil,  there  would  have  been  no  merit  in  refraining 
from  it,  and  keeping  the  commandment.  He  did  ever,  there- 
fore, prefer  the  Creator  unto  the  creature,  the  glory  of  His 


1 2  8       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

Father  to  the  glory  of  things  seen  and  temporal,  the  law  of 
the  Spirit  to  the  law  of  the  flesh,  His  Father's  will  unto  His 
own  will  ;  and  so  was  fitted  to  be  the  sacrifice,  holy  and 
blameless,  without  fault  in  the  sight  of  God  and  in  the  sight 
of  man.  "  He  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his 
mouth ;  ...  he  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate 
from  sinners ; "  and  yet  carrying  about  with  Him  a  tabernacle 
of  flesh,  into  which  our  mortal  enemies  had  poured  all  their 
poisoned  arrows.  This  fallen  creature  substance,  thus  preyed 
upon,  thus  wrestled  for,  by  him  that  had  the  power  of  death 
and  of  corruption,  our  Lord  and  Redeemer  must  redeem  out 
of  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  carry  into  the  acceptable  and 
honourable  place  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high  : 
which  being  accomplished,  it  was  proved  that  a  created  sub- 
stance, in  which  sin  and  Satan  had  power,  might  yet  be 
wrested  out  of  their  hands,  and  presented  blameless  and 
faultless  in  the  presence  of  God  ;  which  I  take  to  be  the  one 
great  thing  to  be  demonstrated.  But  if  Christ's  flesh  was 
never  obnoxious  to  Satan's  power  as  mine  is,  but  in  some 
lesser  degree,  or  not  at  all,  what  proof  have  I  received  by  His 
resurrection  that  I  also  am  capable  of  resurrection .''  The 
saints  who  rose  with  Him  might,  indeed,  afford  some  hope  to 
me,  but  His  rising  could  afford  none.  I  say,  then,  that 
Christ's  flesh  was  as  mine  is,  liable  to  all  temptation,  that 
through  it  He  might  be  tempted  like  as  we  are ;  but  that  His 
soul,  though  brought  into  consciousness  and  feeling  of  these 
temptations  through  its  union  to  His  body,  as  my  soul  is  to 
my  body  united,  was  yet,  through  its  having  been  taken  pos- 
session of  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  in  consequence  of  its 
having  been  taken  up  into  union  with  the  Second  Person, 
prevented  from  ever  yielding  to  any  of  those  temptations  to 
which  it  was  brought  conscious,  and  did  reject  them  every 
one — yea,  did  mourn  and  grieve,  and  pray  to  God  con- 
tinually, that  it  might  be  delivered  from  the  mortality,  cor- 
ruption, temptation,,  which  it  felt  in  its  fleshy  tabernacle ; 
and  was  heard  in  that  it  feared.  Now,  no  one  was  ever  thus 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  though  Jeremiah  and 
the  Baptist  are  declared  to  have  been  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  from  their  mother's  womb,  yet  their  souls  came  not 


BY  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         129 

possessed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  they  were  born  by  ordi- 
nary generation  ;  and  therefore  they  must  have  been  capable 
of  regeneration ;  which  implies  that  they  were  in  their  crea- 
tion-state sinful,  seeing  they  needed  the  washing  of  regenera- 
tion and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not  the  time 
during  which  we  are  unregenerate,  nor  is  it  the  number  of 
sins  which  we  have  committed  in  our  unregenerate  state,  but 
it  is  the  fact  that  we  need  regeneration,  which  constitutes  our 
original  sinfulness  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God. 

2.  Now,  though  I  have  thus  fully  discoursed  of  the  birth- 
holiness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  do  not  think  that  this 
anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  that  which  constitutes  Him 
High  Priest ;  which  office,  as  both  Peter  (Acts  ii.)  and  Paul 
(Heb.  V.)  declare,  He  took  not  upon  Him  until  after,  or 
rather  by  virtue  of.  His  resurrection,  when  He  proved  Himself 
to  be  the  first-begotten.  And  what,  then,  is  this  first  anoint- 
ing of  the  Holy  Ghost  answerable  to  under  the  law  .-*  It 
correspondeth  to  the  seven  holy  things  of  the  sanctuary,  which 
were  anointed  with  holy  oil,  before  there  was  a  high  priest  to 
minister  thereat.  By  virtue  of  this  anointing,  His  body  became 
the  holy  altar,  the  holy  laver,  the  holy  shew-bread,  the  holy 
lamp,  the  holy  golden  table,  and  the  holy  ark  of  the  cove- 
nant ;  but  He  was  not  the  High  Priest  as  yet,  who  is  to 
minister  thereat.  Neither  did  He  become  the  High  Priest 
in  virtue  of  His  anointing  with  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the 
occasion  of  His  baptism  ;  which,  if  I  err  not,  was  His  anoint- 
ing to  the  prophetical  office,  answering  to  the  anointing  of 
Elisha  by  the  hand  of  Elijah.  For  John  the  Baptist,  which 
is  Elias,  expressly  declareth,  that  the  reason  of  His  coming  to 
baptize  with  water  was,  that  the  Lamb  of  God  should  be  made 
manifest  to  Israel  :  as  it  is  written  (John  i.  33,)  "  And  I  knew 
him  not,  but  he  that  sent  me  to  baptize  with  water,  the  same 
said  unto  me.  Upon  whom  thou  shalt  see  the  Spirit  descend- 
ing and  remaining  on  him,  the  same  is  he  which  baptizeth 
with  the  Holy  Ghost."  Yet  that  Christ  did  not  baptize  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  until  after  His  resurrection,  is  expressly  de- 
clared by  the  evangelist  John,  in  these  words,  "  For  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  not  yet  given," — or,  as  it  is  in  the  original,  "  was 
not  yet," — that  is,  was  not  manifested  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
VOL.  V.  I 


1 30       THE  INCARNA  TTON—ITS  ME THOD : 

— "because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified."  Meanwhile, 
therefore,  John  the  Baptist,  by  the  baptism  of  Avater,  did  make 
Jesus  manifest  as  the  Prophet  of  Israel,  about  to  become  the 
Baptizer  with  the  Holy  Ghost :  as  Elias  anointed  Elisha  to 
be  prophet  in  his  room,  so  the  Baptist  anointed  Christ.  And 
yet  it  was  not  the  Baptist's  sprinkling  or  anointing  with  water, 
but  the  Holy  Ghost  descending  in  the  form  of  a  dove,  which 
manifested  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  in  whom  He  was  well 
pleased.  But  this  is  a  nice  point,  upon  which  it  may  be  ne- 
cessary to  discourse  a  little  before  going  forward. 

The  first  question  is.  What  connexion  the  baptism  by  John 
had  with  the  manifestation  of  Jesus  unto  Israel .-"  I  answer, 
It  was  not  the  very  manifestation,  but  a  necessary  step  to  it. 
The  Holy  Ghost,  being  minded  to  connect  Himself  with  the 
ordinance  of  washing  with  water,  would  not  manifest  Himself 
unto  the  people  as  the  property  of  Christ  ever  after  to  be 
holden  and  dispensed  by  Him,  until  that  same  ordinance  of 
baptism  had  been  done  on  Him  also.  By  this  Divine  arrange- 
ment two  things  are,  moreover,  taught, — that  baptizing  with 
water  is  not  in  itself  the  substance  of  the  ordinance,  but 
needeth  to  have  joined  therewith  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  For  not  only  were  these  two  things  separated  in  the 
baptism  of  Christ,  but  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  read 
of  some  who  had  been  baptized  into  the  baptism  of  John 
and  had  not  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  nor  even  known  that 
there  was  a  Holy  Ghost.  So  that  John's  baptism  was  a 
baptism  unto  expectation ;  but  Christ's  baptism  is  a  baptism 
•unto  possession.  And,  methinks,  in  these  times  they  believe 
themselves  to  be  baptized  only  into  the  expectation  of 
receiving,  and  not  into  the  actual  receiving,  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  into  John's  baptism,  and  not  into  Christ's  baptism ; 
which  will  be  followed  with  the  forgetting  that  there  is  a 
Holy  Ghost.  Another  question,  arising  out  of  this  special 
anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is.  Whereto  did  it  profit .''  and 
for  what  end  was  it  given  }  I  answer.  That  it  did  profit 
unto  the  information  of  Christ's  mind  with  all  prophetic  wis- 
dom and  with  all  prophetic  power  of  signs  and  wonders  ;  and 
it  was  unto  the  end  of  fitting  Him  for  the  ofiice  of  preaching 
the  gospel  unto  the  poor,  of  binding  up  the  broken-hearted, 


BY  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         131 

of  proclaiming  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the 
prison  to  them  that  are  bound,  of  proclaiming  the  acceptable 
year  of  the  Lord.  But  it  may  be  asked,  Was  not  Christ  fur- 
nished with  this  power  even  from  His  mother's  womb  ?  I 
answer.  No :  He  "  grew  in  stature  and  in  wisdom,  and  in 
favour  with  God  and  man."  He  truly  passed  through  the 
various  stages,  from  childhood  up  to  manhood,  not  merely  as 
to  His  body,  but  as  to  His  mind  ;  and  in  order  to  enable 
Him  to  speak  as  never  man  spake  He  must  have  a  special 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  to  enable  Him  to  heal 
all  that  were  oppressed  with  the  devil.  But  on  this  point  let 
the  apostle  Peter  speak,  who  said  unto  Cornelius  and  his  com- 
pany, "  The  word  Avhich  God  sent  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ;  (he  is  Lord  of  all;)  that 
word,  I  say,  ye  know,  which  was  published  throughout  all 
Judea,  and  began  from  Galilee,  after  the  baptism  which  John 
preached ;  how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  with  power ;  who  went  about  doing  good, 
and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil ;  for  God  was 
with  him."  It  may  be  asked  further.  And  what  signification 
could  there  be  in  washing  Christ  with  water,  who  had  done 
no  sin  ?  I  answer.  Just  the  same  reason  as  there  was  for  the 
purification  of  His  mother,  and  for  His  own  circumcision  ; 
because  He  possessed  the  same  flesh  with  other  men,  and 
therefore  needed,  like  other  men,  as  He  said  unto  John,  to 
"  fulfil  all  righteousness."  For  when  John  said,  "  I  have 
need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and  comest  thou  to  me  }  Jesus, 
answering,  said  unto  him,  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now,  for  thus  it 
becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness."  These  are  great 
visible  demonstrations  of  the  truth  which  we  have  argued 
above,  that  Christ  took  flesh  and  blood  with  the  brethren  : 
as  it  is  written,  "  Forasmuch  as  the  children  were  partakers  of 
flesh  and  blood,  He  himself  also  took  part  of  the  same."  It 
was  signified,  by  His  baptism  in  Jordan,  that  He  was  clean 
from  the  sins  and  defilements  of  flesh,  through  the  Holy 
Ghost  dwelling  in  His  soul.  His  baptism  with  water  signi- 
fied that  He  was  the  washed,  cleansed,  and  holy  One ;  and 
the  baptism  of  the  others  signified  that  through  One,  whom 
John  testified  of,  they  also  should  be  washed  and  purified, 


1 3  2       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

when  He  should  come  who  would  baptize  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  John's  baptism  was  for  the  manifestation  of  Jesus  as 
the  baptizer  with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  when  the  Holy 
Ghost  had  manifested  Jesus  from  amongst  the  baptized  with 
water,  John's  baptism  did  point  to  this  One  as  its  end ;  did, 
as  it  were,  hand  the  people  over  to  Him,  as  the  Lamb  of  God 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  baptizeth  whom 
the  Father  pleaseth  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  had,  there- 
fore, to  believe  upon  Jesus,  as  the  Lamb  of  God  about  to  be 
sacrificed,  and  as  the  quickening  Spirit,  the  second  Adam> 
about  to  beget  sons  unto  God.  John's  baptism  did  point  the 
respects  of  men  unto  Jesus  the  Prophet,  and  unto  Jesus  the 
Lamb  slain,  and  unto  Jesus  the  risen  Christ  and  Lord,  who 
received  power  at  His  resurrection,  and  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost put  it  forth  in  baptizing  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 

There  is  yet  another  and  a  higher  mystery,  in  that  baptism 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  which  Christ  received  at  His  baptism 
with  water,  besides  that  which  we  have  opened  above  :  It  did 
not  only  constitute  Him  the  Prophet  and  possess  Him  with 
all  prophetic  gifts,  and  shew  Him  as  the  Prophet  the  seal  of 
all  the  prophets — from  whom  they  had  derived  their  light,  as 
the  morning  star  deriveth  its  light  from  the  sun,  whose  rising 
it  doth  herald  unto  the  earth — but,  moreover,  this  baptism 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  Him  truly  and  literally  that 
same  baptism  of  power  and  holiness  with  which  He  was 
afterwards  to  baptize  His  Church,  when  He  should  have 
ascended  up  on  high.  The  baptism  which  He  received  in 
His  conception  enabled  Him  to  keep  the  law,  and  to  fulfil 
all  the  righteousness  of  the  law :  but  it  did  no  more  :  and  to 
this  completion  of  the  legal  work  He  alludeth,  when  He  said 
unto  the  hesitating  Baptist,  "  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil 
all  righteousness."  But  after  His  baptism  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  He  began  to  live  the  life  above  law  which  His  Church, 
that  should  be  afterwards  baptized,  was  to  live  until  His 
second  coming.  God  testified  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was 
the  Person  whom  He  had  by  the  Baptist  foreshewn,  as  about 
to  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  baptizing  Him  then  and 
there  upon  the  spot.  Thus  giving  Him  the  precedency  of  all 
the  baptized  spiritual  Church,  as  in  His  resurrection  He  hath 


BY  TA  KING  FALLEN  HUM  A  NIT  Y.         133 

the  precedency  of  all  the  resurrection  Church.  In  His  life, 
anterior  to  John's  baptism,  He  fulfilled  the  law,  and  made  it 
honourable,  and  gathered  up  its  authority  and  its  righteous- 
ness into  His  own  person,  to  do  with  it  as  He  might  see  good  ; 
but  from  John's  baptism  He  began  to  set  it  aside,  as  we 
Christians  are  required  to  do,  and  to  live  a  life  in  the  power 
of  the  demonstration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we  also  are  re- 
quired to  do.  From  that  time  forth,  accordingly,  began  His 
conflict  with  the  spirits  of  darkness,  such  as  we  unto  this  day 
have  to  maintain  :  from  that  time  forth  also  began  His  power 
of  casting  out  spirits,  of  preaching  the  gospel,  of  forgiving 
sin,  of  healing  infirmities,  of  liberty  and  of  power ;  in  which 
spiritual  course  also  all  that  have  been  baptized  with  the 
Spirit  are  required  to  walk.  Thus  He  shewed  us  an  example 
that  we  should  follow  His  steps ;  and  hereby  He  became  the 
great  prototype  of  a  Christian,  as  He  had  been  the  great 
antitype  of  all  the  holy  men  under  the  law.  And  this  con- 
tinued, as  I  judge,  until  He  fell  into  the  agony  and  the  pangs 
of  death  ;  when  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  through  which  He 
had  enjoyed  the  light  of  His  Father's  countenance,  was  for  a 
season  removed  away,  that  He  might  know  the  hour  and  the 
power  of  darkness ;  and  so  become  the  great  example  unto 
His  Church  of  patience,  resignation,  faith,  and  every  grace  of 
suffering,  under  those  desertions  of  the  Divine  presence,  and 
oppressions  of  the  powers  of  darkness,  to  which  His  Church 
was  again  and  again,  and  very  often,  to  be  subjected,  by  the 
sovereign  will  and  disposal  of  God. 

In  thus  pointing  out  the  successive  changesof  conditionwhich 
Christ  underwent  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  I  am  opening  the  wis- 
dom of  God  in  bringing  our  Great  High  Priest  unto  perfection. 
I  am  unfolding  no  change  in  the  eternal  and  essential  Divinity 
of  the  Son,  which  is  unchangeable,  being  very  God  of  very 
God ;  but  I  am  unfolding  certain  changes  which  passed  upon 
the  humanity,  and  by  virtue  of  which  the  humanity  was 
brought  from  the  likeness  of  fallen  sinful  flesh,  through  vari- 
ous changes,  unto  that  immortality  and  incorruption  and  sove- 
reign Lordship  whereunto  it  hath  now  attained,  and  wherein 
it  shall  for  ever  abide.  For  to  me  it  is  most  manifest,  that 
the  eternal  Godhead  of  the  Son  did  not  despise  the  Virgin's 


1 34       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD : 

womb,  but  was  in  deed  and  in  truth  united  personally  with 
the  embryo  of  a  man — was  born  into  the  world  a  babe,  and 
laid  in  a  manger.  So  that  what  the  Vir'gin  bore  is  to  be  called 
very  God  ;  what  was  laid  in  a  manger  is  to  be  called  very  God. 
What  was  circumcised  ;  what  sought  knowledge  of  the  scribes 
and  doctors  in  the  temple  ;  what  grew  in  wisdom  and  in  sta- 
ture, and  in  favour  with  God  and  man ;  what  was  in  subjec- 
tion to  His  parents  ;  what  was  baptized  in  Jordan ;  what  was 
tempted  of  the  devil ;  what  went  about  doing  good,  healing 
all  that  were  oppressed  with  the  devil ;  what  was  crucified ; 
what  died — all  these  actings  and  sufferings  are  proper  unto 
God  in  that  human  nature,  which  is  as  much  of  Him  as  the 
Divine  nature  is  of  Him.^  There  is  a  double  operation,  a  two- 
fold will — as  we  shall  hereafter  explain — one  with  the  God- 
head ever  consubstantial,  and  out  of  the  absolute  unto  the 
manhood  condescending,  in  order  to  suffer  and  to  act :  the 
Godhead  ever  emptying  itself  into  the  manhood  :  the  man- 
hood not  containing  the  Godhead,  but  consenting  with  har- 
mony to  the  mind  of  the  Godhead.  And  not  until  these  two 
operations  have  taken  place  is  any  act  of  Christ's  complete. 
The  person,  the  /  who  speaketh,  acteth,  sufifereth  in  Christ,  is 
not  the  Divine  nature,  nor  yet  is  it  the  human  nature,  alone ; 
but  it  is  the  Divine  nature  having  passed  into  the  human  na- 
ture, and  therein  effecting  its  will  and  purpose  of  acting  or  of 
suffering.  I  totally  reject — for  reasons  which  will  appear  in 
the  sequel  of  this  discourse — the  language  of  those  divines 
who  say,  "  Now  the  Divine  nature  acteth,  now  the  human 
nature  acteth  ;"  language  which  I  hold  to  be  essentially  Nes- 
torian,  making  two  persons  in  Christ.  I  say,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  in  every  act  of  Christ  the  Divine  nature  acteth  and 
the  human  nature  acteth  ;  the  former,  by  self-contractian  unto 
the  measure  of  the  latter  ;  the  latter,  by  coming  into  harmony 
with  the  former  through  the  mighty  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
In  therefore  pointing  out  the  successive  changes  which  passed 
upon  the  humanity  of  Christ,  and  shewing  Him,  first  as  a  man 
under  the  Law ;  then  as  a  man  under  the  Spirit,  enjoying  the 
joy  of  God's  chosen  ones ;  then  under  the  hour  and  power  of 
darkness,  suffering  the  agonies  of  God's  chosen  ones,  when  it 
pleaseth  the  Father  for  their  sins  to  chastise  and  rebuke  them  ; 


BY  TA  KING  FALLEN  HUM  A  NITY.         1 3  5 

I  am  doing  no  more  than  shewing  the  gradual  progress  unto 
perfection  through  which  the  body,  the  humanity,  of  Christ 
came,  that  it  might  be,  during  the  days  of  His  flesh,  the  per- 
fect thing,  the  all-exemplifying  thing,  the  beginning  and  the 
ending,  the  alpha  and  the  omega,  the  first  and  the  last ;  both 
the  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  the  circumcised  and  the  baptized, 
the  living  and  the  dead,  and  the  living  for  evermore.  And  it 
doth  but  remain  that  we  proceed  a  little  onwards  to  speak  of 
the  dead  body  of  Christ  while  it  lay  in. the  tomb,  yet  saw  not 
corruption. 

3.  The  true  doctrine,  therefore,  of  Christ's  body,  as  to  its 
mortality  or  immortality,  seemeth  to  be  rightly  expressed  thus: 
The  flesh  He  took  of  the  Virgin  was  mortal  and  corruptible, 
in  the  same  manner,  to  the  same  degree,  and  for  the  same 
reason,  that  the  rest  of  her  flesh  which  was  not  taken,  that  all 
flesh  whatsoever  of  Adam  and  Eve  descended,  is  mortal  and 
corruptible.  Which  attributes  of  mortality  and  corruption 
flesh  deriveth  not  from  the  manner  of  its  propagation,  nor 
from  its  propagation  at  all,  but  anterior  to  all  propagation, 
from  that  very  word  of  God  which  saith,  "  In  the  day  that 
thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  When  the  fruit  of 
the  forbidden  tree  had  been  eaten,  from  that  time  forth  flesh 
— that  is,  the  body  of  man,  the  bodies  of  all  men,  in  our  first 
parents  contained,  as  all  trees  and  plants  were  contained  in 
the  trees  and  plants  which  God  created  and  made — the  body 
of  flesh,  I  say,  became  mortal  and  corruptible  from  thence ; 
and  shall  so  continue,  until  all  flesh  shall  have  passed  into 
death,  anterior  to  the  universal  resurrection  and  common  judg- 
ment. And  I  may  observe,  by  the  way,  that  the  universality, 
the  stability,  the  unchangeableness  of  this,  the  law  of  all  body 
of  Adam  descended,  doth  raise  into  a  very  high  and  vast  im- 
portance those  exceptions  of  Enoch  and  Elias,  the  only  ones 
which  have  ever  been  permitted — and  undoubtedly  not  with- 
out the  gravest  causes  and  greatest  ends  permitted ;  which  I 
think  are,  to  shadow  forth  the  great  mystery  which  Paul 
teacheth  in  i  Cor.  xv.,  that  "  we  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we 
shall  all  be  changed."  This  change  of  the  living  God  was 
not  to  shew  in  the  person  of  His  own  Son,  who  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world  was  destined  to  be  slain  :  therefore  it 


1 36       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

was  necessary  to  shew  it  forth  in  some  one  or  other  of  the 
types  and  forerunners  of  His  Son.  And  yet,  to  the  end  that 
in  this  also  He  might  have  the  pre-eminence,  the  transfigura- 
tion upon  the  Mount  was  given,  and  EHas  made  to  attend 
upon  the  changed  Lord;  in  order  to  signify  and  shew,  tliat 
not  only  did  the  resurrection  stand  in  Christ,  but  likewise  tiie 
changing  of  the  living,  the  rapture  of  the  saints,  which  v/as 
foreshadowed  in  the  rapture  of  Elias.  But  whether  there  be 
any  speciality  in  the  translation  of  Enoch,  besides  and  above 
that  which  was  in  the  changing  of  Elias,  and  what  that  spe- 
ciality is,  I  confess  myself  at  present  unable  to  say.  Seeing 
then  that  the  law  of  flesh,  undeviated  from  save  in  those  two 
exceptions,  is  to  be  mortal  and  corruptible,  I  hold,  that  wher- 
ever flesh  is  mentioned  in  Scripture,  mortality  and  corruption 
are  the  attributes  of  it ;  and  that  when  it  is  said  Christ  came 
in  the  flesh,  it  is  distinctly  averred  that  He  came  in  a  mortal 
and  corruptible  substance  :  and,  though  I  would  judge  no 
one,  yet  would  I  warn  the  Church  to  take  care  how  they 
undervalue  or  contradict  the  mortality  and  corruptibleness  of 
Christ's  body,  which  I  hold  to  be  no  less  an  error  than  to  deny 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  come  in  the  flesh. 

Well  then,  Christ,  having  taken  to  Himself  mortal  and  cor- 
ruptible flesh,  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  consisteth  in 
making  that  flesh  immortal  and  incorruptible ;  but  first  it 
must  be  proved  to  be  mortal,  before  it  can  be  proved  to 
be  immortal.  Immortal,  Christ  is  to  become,  by  overcom- 
ing death,  and  him  that  had  the  power  of  death;  not  by 
escaping  and  never  seeing  death,  but  by  seeing  it,  tasting  of 
it,  and  overcoming  it.  He  died,  therefore,  because  He  had 
taken  flesh  and  blood  with  the  brethren  ;  because  He  had 
taken  true  flesh.  And  the  man  who  says  that  Christ  did  not 
die  by  the  common  property  of  flesh  to  die,  because  it  was 
accursed  in  the  loins  of  our  first  parents,  that  man  doth  deny 
that  Christ  was  under  the  curse  ;  he  doth  deny  that  Christ 
was  made  a  curse  at  all ;  he  doth  deny  that  Christ  was  made 
sin  at  all ;  yea,  he  doth  deny  that  the  Word  was  made  flesh 
at  all.  Christ  came  to  death,  in  order  to  prove  Himself  to  be 
of  the  seed  of  Adam,  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  of  the  seed  of 
David,  and  of  the  substance  of  the  Virgin  ;  bone  of  our  bone, 


BY  TA  KING  FALLEN  HUM  A  NITY.         1 3  7 

and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  For,  if  flesh,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures 
everywhere  else  meaneth  that  substance  from  Adam  generated 
under  the  law  of  sin  and  death  ;  then,  where  it  is  said  that 
the  Word  was  made  flesh,  it  must  be  meant  that  He  was 
made  this  very  same  substance ;  or  else  the  Holy  Spirit  doth 
speak  an  enigmatical,  yea,  and  a  deceptions  language. 

But,  besides  this,  the  establishment  of  Christ's  very  and 
true  manhood  in  the  fallen  state  thereof,  which  could  only  be 
unequivocally  and  indubitably  demonstrated  by  death,  it  was 
necessary,  moreover,  to  demonstrate  that  He  differed  from  all 
men  in  this  respect,  that  He  never  sinned  ;  for,  if  He  sinned, 
atonement  and  reconciliation  are  made  void  for  ever.  It  must 
be  shewn,  that  the  death  which  He  died  He  died  not  for  His 
own  sins,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  world  ;  that  it  was  vicarious, 
and  not  in  His  own  deserving ;  that  it  was  for  the  Father's 
glory,  and  not  for  His  own  punishment ;  that  it  was  with 
free-will  acting  of  the  Second  Person  unto  the  fulfilment  of 
an  eternal  purpose  of  Godhead,  and  not  a  necessity  induced 
by  any  cause  or  for  any  sake.  Yea,  I  will  go  a  little  higher, 
and  say,  it  was  necessary  to  prove  that  death  itself,  and  sin 
itself,  were  only  servants  unto  the  glory  of  the  Divine  purpose 
in  Christ ;  and  that  a  fallen  world  was  only  the  stage  between 
a  created  world  and  a  redeemed  world  ;  and  a  stage  as  neces- 
sary to  be  gone  through,  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
purpose,  as  creation  itself  And  how  is  the  subserviency  of 
sin,  and  the  subserviency  of  death,  unto  the  great  purpose  of 
God  and  the  glory  of  Christ,  to  be  demonstrated  }  I  answer, 
By  His  dying,  and  yet  not  seeing  corruption.  To  corrupt,  is 
for  flesh  to  change  its  form,  and  dissolve  again  into  its  pri- 
meval dust.  Corruption  is  the  great  proof  of  a  creation  fallen. 
Creation  out  of  the  dust  composeth  flesh :  corruption,  the 
antagonist  of  creation,  into  dust  resolveth  flesh  again.  If 
Christ,  therefore,  Avas  in  very  flesh  ;  nay,  if  Christ  was  not 
an  angel,  or  an  archangel — that  is,  if  He  wore  visible  and 
material  form ;  that  is,  if  He  had  a  body  — then  He  must 
be  liable  to  corruption,  as  well  as  to  death.  And  why, 
then,  seeing  He  saw  death,  saw  He  not  corruption  .''  This 
question  let  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  answer,  as  it  is  writ- 
ten in  the   i6th  Psalm,  at  the  8th  verse  :  "  I  have  set  the 


o 


8       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD , 


Lord  always  before  me  :  because  he  is  at  my  right  hand 
I  shall  not  be  moved :  therefore  my  heart  is  glad,  and 
my  glory  rejoiceth  :  my  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope." 
Why,  I  ask,  shall  His  flesh  rest  in  hope  ?  For  the  same 
reason  for  which  His  heart  is  glad,  and  His  glory  rejoiceth, 
— because  He  hath  set  the  Lord  always  before  Him,  be- 
cause the  Lord  is  at  His  right  hand.  Therefore  His  flesh 
resteth  in  hope  ;  therefore  also,  he  continueth,  "  Thou  wilt 
not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine 
Holy  One  to  see  corruption."  This  deliverance  from  see- 
ing corruption  He  received,  because  He  was  God's  Holy 
One;  because  He  had  set  the  Lord  always  before  Him; 
because  He  had  hstened  to  the  counsel  of  the  Lord ;  because 
He  had  made  the  Lord  the  portion  of  His  inheritance  and  of 
His  cup  ;  because  He  had  not  offered  the  drink-offerings  of 
bloody  idolaters,  nor  taken  up  their  names  into  His  lips; 
because  His  delights  had  been  with  the  excellent  in  the 
earth,  and  the  saints ;  because  Jehovah  He  had  declared  to 
be  His  Lord ;  because  in  God  He  did  put  His  trust :  or,  in 
one  word,  to  sum  up  the  various  descriptions  of  His  life  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  psalm,  because  He  had  lived  a  life  of 
faith,  and  of  prayer,  and  of  holiness  undefiled.  This  is  the 
reason  why  He  saw  not  corruption.  This  is  the  reason  why 
He  could  not  be  held  by  the  pains  of  death,  (Acts  ii.)  This 
also  is  the  reason  why  He  was  saved  from  death,  (Heb.  v.  7 ;) 
because  "  He  had  offered  up  prayers  and  supplications,  with 
strong  crying  and  tears,"  in  the  days  of  His  flesh.  \\\  order, 
therefore,  to  put  a  difference  between  this  man,  who  had  lived 
and  died  like  other  men,  and  all  others  who  had  in  like  wise 
lived  and  died  ;  in  order  to  prove  that  His  life  was  blameless 
and  sinless,  though  at  all  times  and  in  all  respects  under  the 
conditions  of  fallible,  yea,  and  of  fallen  men ;  His  body  was 
not  suffered  to  see  corruption.  The  not  suffering  of  it  to  see 
corruption  was  the  beginning  of  the  Father's  work  in  honour- 
ing and  glorifying  His  Son,  I  may  say  that  it  was  the 
resurrection  begun  :  not  indeed  the  activity  of  God's  pervad- 
ing Spirit  to  transmute  the  matter  of  His  body  into  a  glorious 
and  unchangeable  substance,  but  the  activity  of  His  Spirit  to 
resist  the  decomposition,  the  corruption,  and  inherent  ten- 


BY  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         139 

dencies  to  decay  and  change,  which  have  been  proper  unto 
all  matter  since  the  fall  of  Adam,  who  was  created  matter's 
lord.  That  Jesus's  body  saw  not  corruption,  when  the  life 
was  gone  forth  of  Him  and  it  was  an  inanimate  lump,  is 
demonstration  and  consolation  unto  the  inanimate  world,  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  able,  when  it  pleaseth  Him,  to  stay  that 
corruption  which  is  in  it,  and  to  take  it  out  of  the  power  of 
that  word  of  God  which  was  spoken  in  Eden,  and  hath  been 
since  fulfilled  in  all  material  substances,  save  only  the  inani- 
mate body  of  Christ.  If  sin  had  been  in  that  flesh  of  the 
Lord  Jesus — that  is  to  say,  if  it  had  ever  been  an  instrument 
unto  sin  ;  if  sin  had  not  been  efficiently  resisted  and  mightily 
expelled  out  of  that  flesh  of  Jesus — then,  rest  ye  assured,  it 
would  have  seen  corruption.  For  what  else  is  corruption  but 
the  consequence  of  sin.-*  In  Adam,  in  the  paradise  of  Eden,  in 
the  world  unfallen,  there  was  perpetual  health,  and  no  vestige 
of  decay ;  no  autumn  with  its  yellow  leaf,  no  winter  with  its 
naked  desolation,  but  one  continued  fulness  of  life,  without  any 
indications  of  change :  and  because  corruption  was  not  able 
to  touch  with  its  destroying  finger  the  body  of  Christ,  all  dead 
and  lifeless  in  the  tomb,  and  separate  both  from  animating 
soul  and  sustaining  Godhead,  it  was  proved  that  the  substance 
which  He  took  of  a  sinful  woman  He  had  been  enabled  to 
preserve  pure  and  spotless,  and  from  it  to  expel  the  powers 
of  corruption  which  were  in  it  by  nature,  which  were  now 
proved  to  be  in  it  no  longer.  Mighty  act  of  Almighty  power! 
comfort  of  all  material  creation !  foundation-stone  of  an  incor- 
rupt and  incorruptible  world !  Ay,  true  it  is,  and  of  verity, 
that  had  the  Lord's  body  remained  years  and  ages  in  the 
tomb,  it  had  never  seen  corruption ;  because  He  had  lived 
without  sin,  and  so  had  redeemed  the  corruptible  into  incor- 
ruption.  But  that  it  was  a  corruptible  which  He  redeemed, 
is  manifest  from  all  the  infirmities  unto  which  He  was  liable  ; 
from  His  weakness.  His  weariness.  His  faintings,  His  wounds, 
His  death.  But  with  death  the  demonstration  of  the  corrup- 
tible endeth.  Thus  far  was  He  one  with  me ;  thus  far  took 
He  part  with  the  children,  and  no  further  :  for  while  His  soul, 
descending  into  the  abode  of  invisible  spirits,  wrestled  there, 
through  the  might  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  personal  union 


1 40       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

of  the  only-begotten  Son,  against  all  spiritual  wickednesses, 
all  invisible  enemies  of  God,  His  body  was  laid  up,  in  order 
to  be  proved  impervious  to  the  infirmities  of  the  dead  inani- 
mate matter.  Oh,  there  it  lay,  the  trophy  of  the  great  con- 
quest which  in  flesh  had  been  achieved  for  flesh,  and  for  flesh's 
monarchy,  the  visible  world.  There  it  lay,  to  prove  that  all 
which  had  been  created  for  Adam  in  the  beginning — sun,  and 
moon,  and  stars,  and  earth,  the  palace  of  Adam  the  monarch 
of  all ;  and  which  had  all  fallen  ;  being  shorn  of  its  glory, 
driven  from  the  presence  of  its  God,  reflecting  not  His  perfect 
image,  ministering  not  His  holy  purposes,  but  overwhelmed 
with  sin  and  possessed  with  corruption — that  all  this  material 
fabric,  from  the  body  of  man  downward  to  the  worm  which 
crawleth  upon  the  earth  ;  and  from  the  earth  upward  to  the 
utmost  bound  of  the  starry  sphere,  wherever  matter  subsisteth, 
and  in  whatever  form  ;  beyond  the  utmost  reign  of  telescopic 
vision,  and  within  the  inmost  penetration  of  microscopic 
vision  ;  that  all  life,  and  all  life's  tenement  and  habitation 
was  now  redeemed,  was  now  rescued,  was  now  delivered  from 
corruption,  and  for  ever  wrested  out  of  the  power  of  death. 
"He  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  for  the  suflering 
of  death,  that  by  the  grace  of  God  he  might  taste  death  for 
every  man  ;"  "  that  by  death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had 
the  power  of  death,  which  is  the  devil." 

So  much,  and  no  less,  do  we  derive  from  the  great  work  of 
God,  that  Christ's  body  saw  not  corruption.  He  gave  Him 
up  to  death — or  rather,  I  should  say,  the  Father  separated 
between  His  soul  and  body — that  He  might  shew  forth  that 
there  was  a  power  in  Christ's  body  greater  than  corruption.  In 
His  life,  God  shewed  that  there  was  a  power  greater  than  sin  ; 
in  His  death.  He  shewed  that  there  was  a  power  greater  than 
corruption.  His  body  in  life  was  all-liable  to  sin,  as  the  body 
of  every  fallen  man  ;  but  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  in  that 
body  preserved  it  from  sin  :  the  same  body  in  the  tomb  was 
liable  to  corruption,  like  the  body  of  another  man  ;  but  the 
power  and  favour  of  the  Godhead  unto  that  which  had  not 
sinned,  preserved  it  from  corruption.  This  did  God  even 
when  His  Son  was   separated  from  it,  and  the   living  one 


BY  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         141 

was  no  longer  in  it,  in  order  to  shew  that  the  Eternal  hath 
as  great  a  love  and  care  over  that  matter  which  the  Holy- 
Spirit  hath  sanctified,  as  He  hath  a  hatred  against  that 
which  sin  hath  defiled  and  the  Spirit  hath  not  sanctified. 
So  that,  as  Christ's  sinless  life  in  sinful  flesh,  as  Christ's  tri- 
umphant conquering  life  in  flesh,  oppressed  and  tempted  by- 
all  the  powers  of  darkness,  is  the  assurance  unto  every  believer 
of  his  own  personal  triumph  over  the  sinfulness  which  is  in 
him  ;  is  the  assurance  unto  the  Church  militant  of  her  triumph, 
sinful  though  she  be,  and  obnoxious  to  the  devil,  the  world, 
and  the  flesh ;  so  is  the  incorruption  of  Christ's  body  in  a 
corruptible  grave,  the  assurance  unto  the  Church,  both  in 
glory  and  in  tribulation  of  the  power  of  God,  greater  than  that 
power  of  corruption  which  is  now  revelling  in  the  bodies  of 
the  saints.  If  Christ  had  sinned  through  the  infirmity  of  His 
flesh,  there  would  have  been  no  assurance  unto  the  Church  of 
attaining  unto  holiness  in  the  flesh  through  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ.  If,  again,  Christ's  body  had  tasted  of  corruption  after 
death  through  its  corruptibility,  then  there  would  have  been 
no  proof  unto  the  separated  souls  of  believers,  nor  unto  us 
daily  expecting  the  same,  of  a  power  greater  than  the  corrup- 
tion which  our  bodies  shall  underlay- ;  but,  as  it  hath  been  set 
forth  above,  and  ever  been  believed  by  the  orthodox  Church, 
we,  who  are  in  sinful  flesh,  have  knowledge  of  a  power  able  to 
produce  holiness  by  prevailing  against  sinful  flesh ;  and  they 
in  the  Jerusalem  above,  whose  bodies  are  mouldered  in  the 
grave,  have  in  the  body  of  Christ,  which  prevailed  against 
corruption,  an  assurance  of  a  power  in  the  Godhead  more 
powerful  than  that  corruption  which  they  underlay.  Now  if 
Christ's  living  flesh  had  not  been  liable  to  all  sin,  if  Christ's 
dead  flesh  had  not  been  liable  to  all  corruption,  this  demon- 
stration of  a  power  able  to  sanctify  actually  sinful  living  flesh, 
and  to  prevail  against  corrupt  flesh,  would  not  have  been 
given ;  and  more  than  this  I  consider  it  unnecessary  to  say, 
except  that  those  who  will  not  receive  these  things,  can  never 
have  a  full  and  legitimate  ground  of  hope,  either  for  holiness, 
or  for  incorruption.  All  which  is  briefly,  but  divinely,  stated 
in  the  8th  chapter  of  the  Romans,  the   nth  verse:  "  But  if 


142       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  dwell  in  you,  he  that 
raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal 
bodies  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you." 

Thus  have  we  opened  the  composition  of  the  person  of 
Christ,  in  tracing  out  the  successive  steps  through  which  His 
flesh  passed  until  the  very  instant  of  its  being  raised  into 
glory  and  immortality  by  the  resurrection.     And  here,  as  hath 
been  already  said,  we  consider  that  our  present  subject  doth 
cease  and  determine,  and  a  new  subject  begin ;  which  is  not 
the   incarnation,  but  the  Church:    for   then  Christ  became 
Head   of  the  Church  :    concerning  which,   His  risen   glory, 
though  I  be  not  at  present  called  upon  to  discourse,  reserving 
it  for  some  future  occasion,  if  God  should  give  me  permission 
and  opportunity,  yet  will  I  add  one  word  in  this  place,  for  the 
sake  of  completeness.     The  body  which  the  Father  had  des- 
tined His  Son  to  subsist  in,  and  of  which  He  gave  such  glorious 
notices  in  the  Old  Testament,  is  not  the  body  of  His  humility, 
suffering  and  dying,  but  the  body  of  His  glory,  reigning  and 
rejoicing  in  unchangeable  power  and  majesty.     All  concern- 
ing which  I  discourse,  that  took  place  between  the  conception 
and  the  resurrection,  is  but  a  state  of  transition  or  passage  unto 
the  state  of  fixed  permanency.     The  embodied  Christ  whom 
the  Prophets  commonly  spoke  of,   is  the  mighty  and  un- 
changeable One,  now  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on 
high.     I  say  not  that  they  forgot  or  omitted  the  mention  of 
His  sorrowful  travail  to  His  joyful  crown  ;  but  I  do  say,  and 
will  never  cease  to  insist,  that  the  Father  in  His  purpose,  and 
the   Prophets    in  the    unfolding   of  that   purpose,  do    most 
chiefly,  and  most  principally,  contemplate  that  which  is  the 
end,  the  consummation,  and  the  eternal  persistence  of  the 
embodied   God.      Therefore,  the  incarnation,  whose  import- 
ance I  am  thus  setting  forth  at  length,  is — all-important  as  I 
make  it — but  the  porch  to  that  temple  of  glory  which  God 
shall  for  ever  inhabit ;  is,  I  may  say,  but  the  foundation  of 
the  temple, — is,  I  may  say,  but  the  conception,  the  bringing 
unto  the  birth,  of  the  God-man.     We  must  proceed  fonvard 
beyond  the  incarnation,  in  order  to  come  at  the  knowledge 
of  the  full  anointing,  and  perfect  preparation  of  the  body  of 


BY  TA  KING  FALLEN  HUM  A  NITY.         143 

Christ ;  which  was  done  at  His  resurrection  :  for  until  the 
resurrection  Christ's  flesh  continued  unchanged :  the  Holy 
Ghost  did  not  till  then  expel  Satan  out  of  that  region  :  who 
had  room  to  come  and  go,  and  with  all  enlargement  to  play 
his  evil  part,  until  the  hour  of  Christ's  death,  yea,  until  the 
hour  of  His  resurrection.  His  death  proved  well  of  what 
kind  was  His  flesh  up  to  that  time — namely,  that  it  was 
mortal.  Its  being  laid  in  the  grave  and  buried,  proved  that 
it  was  of  the  corruptible.  Now,  that  which  is  mortal  and 
corruptible  is  not  yet  taken  possession  of  by  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  and  therefore  I  hold,  that  up  to  this  time  the  holy 
ointment  had  not  anointed  Him  from  the  crown  of  the  head 
to  the  skirts  of  His  garments.  But  when  the  Holy  Ghost, 
inhabiting  His  separate  soul,  which  was  united  unto  the  God- 
head, did  come  unto  His  dead  body  that  was  kept  from 
seeing  corruption,  and  quicken  it  with  eternal  and  immortal 
life,  instantly  all  mortality  and  corruption  were  thenceforward 
expelled  from  it  for  ever ;  and  the  Seed  of  woman,  of  mortal, 
sinful  woman,  the  Seed  of  David,  the  Seed  of  Abraham,  was 
manifested  in  immortal  and  incorruptible  life  and  glory  ;  the 
true  Adam  was  born ;  the  Beginning  of  the  creation  of  God 
was  made  known  ;  the  Foundation-stone  of  the  building  was 
laid ;  the  body  prepared  for  Him  in  the  purpose  of  the 
Father  was  possessed  ;  the  fore-birth  of  creation's  child  was 
ended  ;  and  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested  in  His  glory  and 
in  His  beauty :  and  from  this  time  forth  creation  in  the  form 
of  regeneration  began  to  be  unfolded  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
given,  because  Jesus  was  now  glorified :  and  now  the  High 
Priest's  anointing  was  completed — one  thing  only  excepted, 
which  is  His  garments  (the  anointing  went  to  the  skirts  of 
the  high  priest's  garments);  "when  the  disciples  went  unto 
the  sepulchre,  he  whom  Jesus  loved  stooping  down,  and 
looking  in,  saw  the  linen  clothes  lying,  yet  went  he  not 
in :  then  cometh  Simon  Peter  following  him,  and  went  into 
the  sepulchre,  and  seeth  the  linen  clothes  lying,  and  the 
napkin  that  was  about  his  head  not  lying  with  the  linen 
clothes,  but  ^\Tapped  together  in  a  place  by  itself"  These 
wrappings  of  His  dead  body  the  Holy  Spirit  altered  not;  but 
His  body  itself  was  wholly  absorbed  in  the  change ;  as  the 


144       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD : 

logicians  say,  it  was  numerically  the  same  body  :  nothing  was 
left  but  the  raiment  which  surrounded  it :  no  film,  no  slough, 
no  particle  dropped  away  from  it.  It  was  regenerated  with  a 
new  life ;  it  was  changed  into  a  glorious  body.  It  was  no 
longer  under  the  ordinary  laws  of  matter:  it  rose  into  the 
heavens  at  its  pleasure ;  it  passed  into  the  invisible  at  its 
pleasure,  and  at  its  pleasure  became  visible  again ;  it  passed 
through  barred  doors ;  it  partook  of  meat  when  it  pleased, 
and  when  it  pleased  it  partook  of  none.  But  its  former  life  it 
laid  down  for  us :  the  blood,  which  is  the  symbol  of  life ;  the 
blood,  which  is  the  life  of  the  natura.1  body,  fell  upon  the  earth, 
and  was  not  resumed  again, — that  is.  He  gave  a  life  for  us, 
though  He  liveth  still :  He  died,  who  had  done  no  sin ;  He 
died  for  our  sins  ;  His  blood  was  shed  for  us.  That  life  lost  is 
life  gained  to  the  world.  And  to  demonstrate  beyond  a  doubt 
that  the  life  lay  in  the  blood,  and  to  shew  us  that  when  Christ's 
blood  was  shed  His  life  was  truly  taken,  was  the  meaning  of 
the  consecration  of  blood  in  Noah's  time,  and  its  continuing 
consecrated  until  that  great  end  had  been  accomplished.  And 
after  all  this  pains  which  God  hath  taken  to  shew  us  that 
Christ  was  truly  mortal,  I  wonder  that  any  one  should  enter- 
tain a  doubt  upon  such  a  matter.  The  subject  we  have 
opened  fully  ;  and  here  we  do  but  observe,  that  His  bloodless 
body  was  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and,  instead  of  its 
blood-life,  received  a  spiritual  and  eternal  life  ;  and  now,  in 
very  truth,  was  both  Christ's  soul  and  body,  His  human  na- 
ture, completely,  thoroughly,  and  fully  anointed  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  for  the  garments  with  which  He  shall  come 
arrayed,  they  shall  be  forthcoming  when  the  elements  of  na- 
ture, the  earth  and  the  heavens,  have  been  purified  to  furnish 
them.  The  garments  of  His  glory  are  to  be  fitted  out  and 
furnished  forth  from  nature's  various  chambers  ;  and  when  the 
creatures,  when  the  whole  creation,  shall  have  finished  with 
their  long  protracted  travail,  and  brought  forth  the  incorrup- 
tible forms  of  matter,  they  shall  be  the  vestures  and  the  glo- 
rious drapery  of  His  person  who  is  Priestjand  Lord  :  Priest,  to 
sanctify  and  purify  all  things ;  and  Lord,  to  command  all 
things  to  serve  and  obey  Him.  And  be  it  further  observed, 
that  that  blood  of  a  blameless  life  which  fell  from  His  cross 


BV  TAKING  FALLEN  HUMANITY.         145 

upon  the  ground,  and  which  the  earth  greedily  drank  up,  is  to 
her  the  assurance  of  hope,  and  speaketh  out  from  the  ground 
better  things  than  the  blood  of  Abel,  crying,  not  for  venge- 
ance, but  for  redemption.  It  is  her  baptism  of  blood  ;  one  of 
the  witnesses  which  witnesseth  of  glory  yet  to  come.  For 
what  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  man,  the  blood  of  a  holy  man  is 
unto  the  ground  :  because  man  is  the  life  of  the  earth,  as  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  life  of  man.  So  that  that  blood  of  Christ, 
being  His  mortal  life,  is  truly  the  redemption  of  the  mortal 
creature,  the  seal  of  the  new  testament  of  blessings. 

And  thus  was  our  High  Priest  anointed  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  Aaron  was  anointed  with  the  holy  anointing  oil ; 
thus,  by  the  operation  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Qhost,  was  the  High  Priest  and  Lord  of  all  creation  anointed. 
This  is  truly  the  work  of  God,  which  was  wrought  in  and 
upon  the  human  nature  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  bring  a  clean 
thing  out  of  an  unclean,  and  to  begin  the  work  of  regenera- 
tion in  the  fallen  world.  And  from  this  time  forth  be- 
ginneth  the  procession  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  Father 
and  the  Son,  through  the  man-soul  of  Jesus  Christ.  So 
that  now  we  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 
The  Holy  Ghost  doth  now  come  through  One  in  human  form, 
and  with  human  sympathies  invested,  in  order  to  work  in  the 
chosen  ones  of  the  Father  that  same  mind  which  is  in  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  we,  who  receive  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit 
unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
are  from  that  time  forth  of  the  same  royal  priesthood,  kings 
and  priests  unto  our  God :  we  are  filled  with  the  spirit  of  a 
holy  Priest  and  King,  even  Christ :  we  become  possessed 
with  the  desires  and  inclinations  of  the  holy  God-man ;  we 
become  the  members  of  the  holy  God-man  ;  and  are  re- 
newed, after  the  image  of  God,  in  righteousness  ^nd  true 
holiness.  Meanwhile  our  fleshly  nature  becometh  restrained, 
but  not  changed  ;  it  longeth  still  after  wickedness,  it  suggest- 
eth  wicked  thoughts,  it  is  assailable  to  every  evil  seducer, 
and  tried  with  every  seduction  :  and  thus  it  ought  to  be  ; 
God  thus  bringeth  us  into  trial.  Arrayed  on  one  side  are  all 
the  powers  of  nature,  unto  which  He  leaveth  us  obnoxious 
through  the  flesh  :  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  spirit,  appre- 
VOL.  V.  K 


1 46       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

bending  our  glory  and  excellency  in  Christ ;  seeing  there 
also  the  love  of  God  manifested,  and  His  grace  shewn  forth  ; 
apprehending  likewise  the  hope  of  a  sanctified  body  in  the 
resurrection,  which  is  Christ,  contendeth  against  the  flesh, 
with  the  world,  which  is  visible :  and,  between  these  two  con- 
trary and  opposite  influences  placed,  the  saint  doth  glorify 
God,  by  preferring  Him  in  Christ,  to  the  wicked  world,  lusted 
after  by  the  flesh  and  by  the  eye.  So  that  verily  we  do 
receive  a  present  sanctification  in  the  soul,  which  holdeth  in 
check  and  prevaileth  over  the  degradation  and  corruption  of 
the  flesh  ;  until  at  death  the  body  descendeth  with  a  good 
hope  into  the  grave,  being  conscious  to  the  Spirit  of  God 
which  had  dwelt  in  it ;  and  well  knowing  that,  "  if  the  Spirit 
of  Him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  us,  He 
that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  our 
mortal  bodies,  by  His  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us." 


PART  II. 

Besides  these  good  effects,  necessarily  resulting  from 
Christ's  taking  our  fallen  humanity,  and  of  which  not  one 
would  have  resulted  had  He  taken  humanity  in  an  unfallen 
state,  there  is  another,  to  which  divines  of  this  age  will  be 
more  alive ;  which  is,  that  there  could  otherwise  have  been 
neither  reconciliation  nor  atonement  between  God  and  man. 
Those,  indeed,  who  consider  atonement  as  a  bargain,  of  so 
much  merit  on  Christ's  side  against  so  much  demerit  on 
ours ;  so  much  suffering  in  His  person,  instead  of  so  much 
suffering  in  ours  ;  will  see  little  or  nothing  in  the  line  of  argu- 
ment which  I  am  now  about  to  pursue.  But  those  who  con- 
sider, as  I  do,  that  this  is  a  most  insufficient,  and,  when  taken 
for  the  whole,  a  most  prejudicial  view  of  the  mystery;  and 
who  understand  atonement  in  its  only  scriptural  sense,  of 
at-one-ment,  or  reconciliation  between  the  holy  Creator  and 
the  unholy  creature ;  that  which  I  am  about  to  argue  will 
appear  of  the  greatest  moment,  and  unanswerable.  With 
respect  to  that  bargain-and-barter  hypothesis,  I  observe,  that 
in  order  to  make  out  of  Christ's  sufferings  an  infinite  quantity 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        147 

to  cover  the  infinite  delinquency  of  His  elect,  they  reason 
thus :  It  was  an  infinite  person  that  suffered,  and  therefore 
His  sufferings  must  be  of  infinite  value.  Now,  with  all  sound 
theologians,  and  with  all  the  doctors,  I  deny  the  possibility  of 
the  Divine  nature  suffering.  The  Godhead  cannot  be  tempted, 
and  how  should  the  Godhead  suffer  .?  The  human  nature  of 
Christ  alone  suffered ;  and  that  is  not  infinite,  but  finite. 
Therefore  there  is  no  infinite  amount  of  suffering  to  balance 
against  the  sufferings  of  the  elect  through  eternity ;  and  so 
the  account  will  not  balance,  and  the  base  theory  falls  to  the 
ground.  Besides  being  illogical,  how  degrading  is  it  to  repre- 
sent the  great  mystery  as  shut  up  in  this,  that  the  Father 
would  have  so  much  punishment,  get  it  where  He  could,  and 
so  He  took  it  out  of  His  own  Son !  That  the  Father  did 
hide  His  face  from  His  Son  ;  that  He  did  say,  "  Awake,  O 
sword,  against  Him  that  is  my  Fellow;"  that  it  pleased  Him 
to  bruise  Him,  and  to  put  Him  to  grief,  there  can  be  no 
doubt — and  any  view  of  the  mystery  which  will  not  give  fair 
interpretation  to  these  vindictive  expressions  of  God's  holi- 
ness, cannot  be  received ; — but  that  orthodox  and  enlarged 
view  which  I  have  given  of  the  Father's  act,  as  bringing 
Christ  into  the  conditions  of  the  fallen  humanity,  doth  well 
and  truly  appropriate  every  utterance  which  the  Father  hath 
uttered,  and  every  act  which  the  Father  hath  done  against 
sinners,  to  be  spoken  and  done  against  Christ  also :  not  by 
substitution  merely,  but  by  reality ;  not  by  imputation  merely, 
but  in  very  truth.  This,  indeed,  is  what  they  cannot  un- 
derstand who  consider  imputation  as  containing  the  whole 
mystery  of  God  ;  whereof  it  is  only  a  part,  though  a  very  im- 
portant part :  and  it  will  prove  utterly  unintelligible,  confu- 
sion worse  confounded,  to  all  those  who  consent  to  the  suffi- 
ciency of  the  debtor-and-creditor  theology  ;  or  have  been 
sucked  by  Satan  into  the  heresy  that  Christ  had  a  humanity 
in  some  way  diverse  from  ours.  This  most  unsound  view  of 
the  matter,  as  the  other  is  most  insufficient,  doth  in  effect 
make  altogether  void  the  Father's  activity  in  the  sufferings 
and  death  of  Christ,  which  we  are  at  such  pains  to  preserve. 
If,  as  these  adversaries  of  the  truth  allege,  Christ  in  His  in- 
carnation did  apprehend  an  immortal  and  incorruptible  sub- 


1 48       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

stance,  and  not  the  very  same  mortal  and  corruptible  which 
you  and  I  inherit  under  the  curse ;  and  if,  by  a  mere  act  of 
power  or  will,  He  brought  it  into  death,  and  laid  it  in  the 
grave,  and,  as  it  were,  rid  Himself  of  it  for  a  season,  then 
why  may  He  not,  by  the  same  act  of  will  and  of  power,  rid 
Himself  of  it  again  for  another  season,  and  another,  and  an- 
other ?  and  why  not  rid  Himself  of  it  for  aye,  and  use  it  as  a 
mantle,  according  to  occasion  ?  and  where  is  the  security  of 
the  redeemed  creature,  that  it  may  not  again  altogether  fall 
out  of  union  with  the  Godhead  ?  But  if  Christ  took  upon 
Himself  our  fallen  and  corruptible  nature,  and  brought  it  up 
through  death  into  eternal  glory,  then  is  the  act  of  the  will 
of  Christ  not  to  lay  down,  but  to  assume  or  take  up  hu- 
manity into  Himself;  and  the  continuance  of  His  act  is  to 
keep  it  in  union  with  Himself,  and  not  for  any  sake  to  dis- 
miss it  from  Himself.  He  takes  it,  He  loves  it,  He  strengthens 
it.  He  sanctifies  it,  He  immortalises  it,  He  glorifies  it.  For  His 
part  He  doth  nothing  but  embrace  it,  and  hold  it  fast  unto  Him- 
self It  is  the  act  not  of  the  Son  but  of  the  Father,  which 
makes  the  flesh  drop  off  from  His  immortal  being  into  death 
and  the  grave.  This,  I  say,  is  the  Father's  act ;  and  it  is  the 
Father's  act  again  to  bring  up  that  body  in  its  changed  and 
glorified  state  :  not,  indeed,  without  Christ's  consent,  but  that 
consent  given,  when  He  consented  to  join  Himself  to  the  mor- 
tal and  corruptible  seed  of  the  woman.  He  consented  to  be 
brought  into  the  possession  of  an  enduring  body  through  the 
transition  state  of  a  mortal  life,  through  the  passage  of  death 
and  the  grave  ;  to  which  consenting,  He  consented  therein  to 
the  act  of  the  holy  Father,  which  required  the  corruptible  and 
mortal  creature-substance  to  fall  off  from  His  immortal  soul 
and  divinity  into  death  and  the  grave.  And  this  is  the  mean- 
ing of  that  remarkable  saying  in  John  x.  17,  18  :  "Therefore 
doth  my  Father  love  me,  because  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I 
might  take  it  again.  No  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it 
down  of  myself:  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have 
power  to  take  it  again.  This  commandment  have  I  received 
of  my  Father."  In  these  words  Christ  assert eth  three  things  : 
first,  that  no  one  whatsoever,  man  or  angel,  had  power  to  take 
His  life  from  Him ;  the  second,  that  it  was  by  Himself  laid 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        149 

down ;  and  the  third,  that  this  was  done  by  the  command- 
ment of  the  Father.     These  three  things  concur  in  His  act  of 
dying :  a  commandment  of  the  Father,  His  own  free  will  to 
obey  that  commandment,  and  His  total  independence  of  any 
third  power  or  influence.     Every  act  of  His  life  was  of  the 
same  kind  ;  done  of  free  will,  without  constraint,  in  obedience 
to  the  absolute  will  of  the  Father.     I  say,  therefore,  Christ 
died  because  the  Father  had  said,  "  Awake,  O  sword,  against 
the  Man  that  is  my  Fellow."    No  one  could  take  His  life  from 
Him.     He  had  but  to  look,  and  they  became  as  stones  ;  He 
had  but  to  speak,  and  they  staggered  and  fell  ;  He  had  but  to 
pray  the  Father,  and  twelve  legions  of  angels  would  have  suc- 
coured Him  ;  but  "  how,  then,  would  the  scriptures  have  been 
fulfilled  .''"      His  Father's  commandment  alone  could  take  that 
life  from  Him ;  His  Father's  commandment  alone  could  make 
Him  suffer  and  die.     It  was  His  Father's  commandment,  and 
His  fiilial  obedience  thereto,  which  brought  Him  into  the  con- 
dition of  suffering  and  dying.    It  pleased  His  Father  to  bruise 
Him,  and  to  put  Him  to  shame,  and  to  make  His  soul  an 
offering  for  sin  ;  and  why  so  ?  not  surely  because  the  Father 
had  ceased  to  love  Him,  for  of  love  there  is  no  suspension  be- 
tween the   Persons   of  the  Godhead.     What  is  it,  then,  for 
which  the  Father  chastiseth  Christ  1  and  for  what  offereth  He 
His  Son  upon  the  cross  1     The  Son   surrendereth   Himself 
unto  the  Father  ;  giveth  Himself  up  wholly  unto  the  Father ; 
and  is  in  the  Father's  hands,  to  be  disposed  of  according  to 
the  Father's  mind.     In  one  act  of  willingness,  when  He  said, 
"  Lo,    I    come,"    all  acts  of  willingness    are  included  ;    His 
Father  may  do  with  Him  thenceforth  after  His  good  plea- 
sure.    The  act  from  thenceforth  of  His  incarnation,  suffer- 
ing, agony,  death,  resurrection,  glorification,  is  the  Father's 
forthshewing  of  His  own  mind  upon  His  w'illing  Son,  unto 
the  instruction  and    edification  of  all  by  whom  it  is   wit- 
nessed, and  to  whom  the  tidings  of  it,  the  fruits  of  it,  shall 
reach,  far  and  wide,  for  ever.      Blessed,  ever  blessed   Son  ! 
who  thus  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  emptied  Himself 
of    His    own    inexhaustible    fulness,    and    yielded    Himself 
to   His  Father,  like  clay  in  the  hand  of  the  potter.     Mar- 
vellous lesson  unto  every  creature  to  do  likewise!  and  for  this 


1 50       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

very  end  designed,  that  we  might  yield  up  that  rebel  inde- 
pendence which  we  falsely  feel,  and  pass  into  the  conditions 
of  the  Father's  will ;  and  by  faith  deliver  ourselves  over  to 
be  crucified,  sacrificed,  brought  down  to  dust ;  yet  never 
doubting,  but  aye  believing,  that  out  of  the  dust  we  shall  be 
exalted  unto  glory.  Christ,  from  the  day  of  His  self-sur- 
render, is  no  longer  His  own  master;  a  servant  evermore,  in 
subjection  evermore,  suspending  Himself  from  the  Father's 
will  evermore ;  and  so  exemplifying  faith  and  obedience  for 
ever  unto  all  the  creatures  ;  and  acknowledging  His  honour. 
His  glory,  and  His  power  to  proceed  from  the  invisible  Father, 
and  teaching  all  creation  to  do  the  same.  Great  Head  of 
subjection  !  great  High  Priest  of  worship  !  great  Heir  of  God  ! 
great  Conveyancer  of  the  inheritance  of  God  unto  all  the  chil- 
dren !  O  my  soul,  honour  Him,  as  thou  honourest  the  Father. 
Now,  then,  having  Christ  in  the  Father's  hands,  that  the 
Father  might  demonstrate  through  Him  His  own  being  and 
His  own  perfection,  and  through  Him  communicate  to  the 
creatures  whatever  can  be  communicated,  what  doth  the 
Father  make  of  Him,  make  with  Him .''  He  maketh  use  of 
Him,  first,  to  shew  what  is  the  enmity  between  Himself  and 
the  fallen  creatures  ;  what  is  the  nature  of  sin,  and  what  the 
nature  of  holiness.  Therefore  joineth  he  Him  unto  the  sinful 
thing  ;  and,  lo,  what  follows  .''  exhaustion  of  Divinity  !  for  its 
blessedness,  suffering ;  for  its  infinity,  narrow  limitation  ;  for 
its  power,  weakness  ;  for  its  glory,  shame  ;  for  its  life,  death  ! 
And  there  endeth  this  first  act  of  the  mystery  of  the  Father's 
will,  which  amounteth  unto  this  awful  truth  :  That  God,  even 
the  mighty  God,  being  personally  joined  to  the  fallen  crea- 
ture, cannot  hinder,  cannot  help,  that  it  should  not  suffer  and 
die ;  be  dark,  and  need  faith ;  be  oppressed,  and  need  com- 
fort ;  be  borne  down,  and  need  the  Holy  Ghost's  sustenance 
continually.  Was  ever  the  weakness  of  flesh  so  proved  as 
by  this,  that  the  personality  of  the  Son  joined  to  it  could  not 
strengthen  it,  without  the  continual  energising  of  the  Holy 
Ghost .''  Was  ever  the  sinfulness  and  mortality  of  the  flesh 
so  proved  as  by  this,  that  the  Holy  One  could  not  keep 
it  from  sin  and  from  corruption  but  by  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost }     Was   ever  God's  alienation  from  the  sinful 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        151 

creature  so  proved,  as  that  the  union  of  Godhead  with  it 
could  not  hold  it  to  Himself,  or  hinder  it  that  it  should  not 
drop  away  into  death  and  pass  into  corruption,  had  not  the 
Holy  Ghost  changed  its  form,  purged  out  its  sinfulness  ? 
after  which  it  can  abide,  and  doth  abide,  in  union  with  the 
Godhead  for  ever ;  but  until  which  it  was,  as  it  were,  but  an 
abortive  attempt  at  a  thing  which  could  not  be.  Doth  not 
this  prove,  that,  let  the  creature  believe  in  Christ  to  the 
uttermost,  and  let  Christ  incline  to  the  creature  in  the  utter- 
most, they  cannot  come  together,  stay  together,  and  be  one, 
otherwise  than  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  chang- 
ing the  creature's  form,  drawing  it  through  death,  and  out  of 
corruption  regenerating  it  ?  So  that  the  act  of  the  Son  to 
redeem  all  mankind  doth  not  suffice  to  deliver  any  from 
death  and  corruption,  or  to  unite  any  with  Himself  in  in- 
fallible and  inseparable  union ;  like  withering  leaves,  we 
shall  drop  off  from  Him  ;  like  fruitless  branches,  be  pruned 
away ;  like  His  owai  body  of  sin,  drop  into  death  and  the 
grave  ;  unless  we  shall  have  partaken  of  that  regenerating 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  He  partook  in  the  tomb  ; 
which  saved  Him  from  corruption,  which  shall  deliver  the 
regenerate  out  of  corruption ;  which  united  His  body,  that 
was  mortal  and  corruptible,  unto  His  immortal  part,  consist- 
ing of  soul  and  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead,  and  fixed  it 
there  in  immortal  union  for  ever  and  ever.  So,  likewise,  doth 
the  Father  hereby  make  it  manifest,  that  of  all  living  and  dead 
flesh,  of  all  flesh  together,  which  cometh  into  death,  no  more 
shall  be  united  for  ever  unto  the  glorious  person  of  Christ, 
save  so  much  only  as  shall  have  partaken  the  regeneration  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  ; — that,  though  all  flesh  be  now  under  Him 
as  Lord ;  though  He  be,  as  it  were,  united  unto  all  flesh,  by 
virtue  of  what  He  did  in  flesh ;  yet  only  so  much  of  it  as  the 
Father  by  the  Holy  Ghost  regenerated  shall  be  brought  up 
in  the  fashion  of  His  glory,  and  all  the  rest  shall  be  brought 
up  in  the  fashion  of  the  mere  and  unmixed  sinful  creature,  to 
inherit  for  ever  the  estate  of  the  second  death.  Behold  how, 
in  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ,  the  Father  openeth  His 
mind  and  purpose ! 

Thus,  having  shewed  the  Father's  activity  in  the  sufferings 


1 5  2       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

of  the  blessed  Lord,  and  that  these  sufferings  come  not  by 
imputation  merely,  but  by  actual  participation  of  the  sinful 
and  cursed  thing,  I  proceed  further  to  express  my  views  of 
imputation,  before  entering  into  the  full  exposition  of  the  re- 
conciliation which  is  wrought  in  flesh  by  the  method  detailed 
above,  of  uniting  the  Godhead  to  fallen  humanity.  The  view 
of  His  humiliation  and  death  in  common  use  is,  that  the  sins 
of  all  the  elect  were  imputed  to  Him,  and  all  the  suffering 
which  through  eternity  they  should  have  borne  laid  upon  Him, 
and  that  His  death  had  no  relation  whatever  to  any  but  God's 
elect.  Let  us  take  this  scheme  in  its  best  form,  and  give  heed 
to  these  questions :  First,  How  then  hath  Christ  purchased 
to  Himself  a  right  over  the  reprobate  as  well  as  the  elect,  for 
His  action  toucheth  them  in  nowise .''  and  how  is  His  finished 
work  to  be  preached  to  the  reprobate  as  well  as  to  the  elect, 
for  it  hath  no  application  to  them  }  To  this  it  is  no  answer 
to  say.  That  we  know  not  the  one  from  the  other.  If  we 
preach  to  all,  we  preach  to  all  ;  if  we  preach  to  a  part,  we 
preach  only  to  a  part.  Christ  must  have  brought  some  benefit 
to  all,  that  the  gospel  should  be  preached  unto  all ; — not  the 
benefit  of  salvation,  as  the  Universalists  damnably  believe,  but 
the  removal  of  the  law,  and  the  introduction  of  grace,  and  the 
condemnation  of  sin  in  the  flesh,  and  the  spoiling  of  Satan,  and 
the  lordship  of  the  fallen  creation  ;  to  lead  them  unto  the 
Father,  that  through  Him  they  may  transact  with  the  Father, 
and  the  Father  transact  with  them,  according  to  the  new  rela- 
tions of  grace.  This  much  we  preach  to  all,  as  having  been 
really  wrought  out  for  all  ;  and  there  leaving  the  general  and 
universal  question,  we  are  ready  to  enter  upon  the  additional 
and  special  question  of  the  election  and  the  regeneration.  We 
have  Christ  in  His  earthly  work  doing  a  common  good  for  the 
fallen  creatures,  but  in  His  risen  work  doing  a  particular  good 
'for  the  election  of  the  Father ;  and  we  say  again,  that  upon  the 
scheme  of  mere  substitution  for  the  elect  in  His  sufferings,  and 
for  them  alone,  this  great  end  of  preaching  a  gospel  unto  all, 
of  preaching  Him  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  them  that 
believe,  cannot  be  attained.  These  two  things,  Christ  con- 
cerning Himself  for  the  elect  only,  and  the  good  of  Christ 
preached  unto  all,  are  contrary  to  one  another,  and  will  never 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        153 

fail  the  one  to  destroy  the  other  :  but  Christ's  doing  in  the 
flesh  a  work  for  flesh  in  general,  and  in  the  spirit  a  work  for 
the  spiritual  or  elect  in  particular,  are  two  truths  which  be 
consistent  with  a  freely  preached  gospel,  and  likewise .  with 
an  elected  Church ;  consistent  also  with  the  present  lordship 
of  Christ  over  all,  and  the  future  resurrection  of  all  in  Christ, 
and  with  their  separate  eternal  destinies  of  heaven  and  hell, 
likewise  in  Christ.  This  way  of  viewing  Christ's  death  as  a 
compensation  in  kind  for  the  election  only,  is  not  peculiar  to 
those  who  hold  the  heterodox  view  of  Christ's  humanity  :  but, 
being  commonly  found  in  company  with  it,  and  indeed  being 
the  only  view  possible  on  such  a  scheme ;  and  moreover, 
being,  as  I  conceive,  partly  the  occasion  of  its  revival  in  these 
times  ;  I  have  thought  it  good  to  remark  upon  it  here,  though 
regarding  it  with  far  more  respect  than  I  do  the  doctrine  of 
Christ's  immortal  and  incorruptible  body,  which  I  utterly 
detest  and  abominate.  Indeed,  this  view  of  Christ's  death, 
so  far  as  it  goes,  expresseth  the  truth  ;  for  Christ  is  indeed  the 
substitute  for  His  people,  and  it  is  the  election  only  who 
realise  the  benefit  of  His  death  ;  but  it  falleth  short,  in  not 
pointing  out  the  relation  which  Christ's  work  hath  unto  the 
reprobate ;  and  for  this  defect,  rather  than  for  any  heinous 
error,  we  have  at  this  time  alluded  to  it,  and  do  now  proceed 
to  explain  the  true  doctrine  of  imputation. 

As  it  seems  to  me,  the  meaning  of  imputation  of  our  sins 
unto  Christ  consisteth  in  these  two  things  : — First,  That  no- 
thing constrained  Him,  as  the  Son  of  God,  but  He  did  of  His 
own  free  will  take  unto  Himself  the  body  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  quickened  of  the  Virgin's  substance,  and  in  this  body 
did  commit  no  sin,  but  in  all  things  did  the  Father's  will,  and 
was  holy  and  blameless.  Whence  it  follows,  that,  whatever 
He  suffered,  and,  which  is  far  more,  whatever  He  forewent  of 
infinite  glory  and  blessedness  in  order  to  suffer,  is  all  to  be 
placed  to  the  account  of  mankind,  and  not  to  His  own  account. 
By  imputation  I  understand,  that  His  humiliation  and  suffer- 
ing were  not  for  anything  which  He  had  done,  but  for  what 
mankind  in  Adam  had  done.  And  to  the  end  He  might 
suffer  for  the  kind,  and  not  for  individuals  of  the  kind.  He 
came  not  by  ordinary  generation ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit  did 


154       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

take  up  a  portion  from  all  the  fallen  substance  before  Him, 
out  of  which  to  make  His  body,  as  He  had  taken  up  a  por- 
tion of  the  earth  to  make  Adam's  body  in  the  beginning. 
He  did  not  now  take  up  a  portion  of  the  earth  to  make 
of  it  an  unfallen  creature,  because  the  work  which  was 
now  to  proceed  was  not  the  work  of  creation,  but  the  work 
of  redeeming  creation.  Not,  therefore,  inorganic  dust,  but 
dust  changed  by  creation's  word  into  flesh  and  blood  He  took, 
and  formed  of  it  the  body  of  Christ.  The  substance  of  created 
manhood  in  an  unquickened  state  He  took,  as  I  may  say,  at 
random,  and  formed  of  it  the  body  of  Christ.  So  that,  as 
the  whole  earth  stood  in  Adam's  body  represented,  with  the 
fate  of  Adam's  body  implicated,  in  it  to  stand  and  fall  and  be 
redeemed  ;  so  likewise  the  whole  substance  of  organised  flesh 
and  blood,  living,  and  dead,  and  to  live,  stood  represented  in 
the  body  of  Christ  which  the  Holy  Spirit  had  formed  from 
the  Virgin's  substance,  to  stand  or  to  fall  according  as  this 
Man  newly  constituted,  this  new  thing  created  of  God,  should 
stand  or  fall.  As  unfallen  creation  stood  represented  in  un- 
fallen Adam,  so  fallen  creation  stood  represented  in  Christ ; 
and  as  in  Adam's  fall  all  together  fell,  so  in  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion shall  all  be  made  alive  again.  This  is  the  first  part  of 
imputation  :  that  He  freely  came  under,  without  any  obliga- 
tion of  whatever  kind,  the  load  and  burden  of  a  fallen  world's 
infirmity  and  sin — or,  if  you  please  to  speak  in  the  language  of 
the  covenant,  the  Father  laid  it  upon  Him  ;  charged  Him  with 
it ;  imputed  it  to  Him  ;  treated  Him  as  the  guilty  one  ;  and, 
as  Luther  said,  the  only  sinner :  so  that  by  His  suffering  and 
death  justice  should  be  appeased,  and  sin  for  ever  done  away 
with.  There  may  be  other  depths  here  that  I  cannot  fathom 
— such  as  the  proportion  between  the  suffering  of  Christ  by 
which  the  sin  was  atoned  for,  and  the  eternal  suffering  from 
which  His  atonement  delivereth  His  people.  I  cannot  tell 
how  this  is,  and  I  do  neither  say  nor  gainsay  it,  being  minded 
only  to  speak  what  the  Lord  hath  made  me  clearly  to 
know.  I  do  indeed  perceive  this  much,  that  no  creature 
could  pay  the  price  of  sin  but  by  eternal  separation  from 
God,  because  I  see  it  to  have  been  so  in  the  fallen  angels  ; 
and  if  so,  then  the  recovery  of  man  must  be  accomplished  by 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        155 

an  act  of  power  of  an  infinite  measure  ;  which  act  Christ's 
was,  by  that  twofold  will  or  operation  which  was  in  Him — 
one  conversant  with  the  Godhead,  and  enlarged  to  its  infinite 
bounds  ;  another  conversant  with  the  manhood,  and  restricted 
to  its  humble  and  suffering-  conditions — these  two  wills,  or 
operations,  as  the  orthodox  fathers  termed  it,  being  necessary 
to  compose  any  act  of  the  Person  Jesus  Christ.  The  /  in 
Him,  embraced  the  infinite  and  the  finite  also  ;  which  gave 
to  every  action  and  feeling  of  His  a  character  of  infinity. 
When  He  suffered,  though  the  Divine  nature  suffered  not, 
yet  came  He  out  of  that  delectation,  and  down  from  that 
elevation,  into  the  human  nature,  which  did  suffer.  And 
this,  not  of  suffering  onlv,  but  of  feeling  and  of  acting  ;  which 
He  did  always  as  a  man  ;  and  in  order  to  do  as  a  man,  must 
first  condescend  from  the  infinitude  of  the  Godhead  in  order 
to  do  it.  In  this  twofold  operation,  in  this  twofold  will,  con- 
sisteth  the  one  personality  of  the  two  natures  of  Christ  ;  His 
God-manhood,  the  hypostatical  union.  His  identity  of  sub- 
stance with  the  Godhead,  His  identity  of  substance  with  the 
fallen  manhood.  And  in  this  I  perceive  everything  which  I 
want, — the  infinite  goodness  of  God,  the  infinite  merit  of 
Christ,  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  the  glory  of  God 
shewn  forth  in  our  deliverance  from  it.  And  I  see  that  there 
is  an  infinite  ocean  of  merit  here,  to  counteract  an  infinite 
ocean  of  demerit  in  the  creature,  if  in  that  way  the  question 
is  to  be  viewed  ;  which,  however,  I  freely  confess,  my  mind 
approveth  not,  to  the  degree  in  which  I  find  it  current  amongst 
some  orthodox  and  pious  men. 

Now,  besides  this  view  of  imputation,  there  is  a  second 
part,  which  seems  necessary  to  complete  the  whole ;  and  this 
is,  the  applying  of  Christ's  righteousness  to  us,  as  the  sins  of 
others  were  applied  unto  Him.  For  He  "  is  made  unto  us 
righteousness  ;"  we  are  "  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him." 
This,  also,  I  know  they  are  wont  to  bring  out  of  what  I  may 
call  the  theology  of  infinities  ;  but,  for  my  part,  I  am  inclined 
to  look  upon  it  as  an  original  part  of  the  purpose  of  God  ;  or, 
if  you  please,  an  original  condition  of  the  covenant  between 
the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  of  which  nothing  more  can  be  said, 
than  that  it  was  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  their  will. 


1 5  6       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

But  with  respect  to  the  thing  itself,  it  consisteth  of  two  parts: 
the  first  universal,  the  second  elective,  in  its  application.  The 
universal  being  that  w'hich  Christ  in  the  flesh  did  for  flesh — 
to  wit,  'redeeming  it  from  sin,  and  from  the  law  which  defined 
its  sinfulness,  and  from  death,  and  from  corruption  ;  and  in- 
stating it  in  God's  favour,  forgiveness,  and  love  ;  bestowing 
upon  flesh  immortality  and  resurrection.  These  things  to- 
gether constitute  the  gospel,  and  are  a  free  bequest  unto  men, 
which  we  ministers  are  appointed  to  tell  them  of  The  other 
part,  which  is  elective,  Christ  did  not  in  the  flesh,  but  received 
from  His  Father  in  gift  and  reward  for  that  which  in  the  flesh 
He  had  done  :  it  is  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  which  to 
bring  many  sons  unto  glory.  This  latter,  being  the  gift  of 
the  Father  unto  Christ,  must  be  regarded  as  the  Father's  ful- 
filling His  part  of  the  covenant ;  and  being  given  for  the  sake 
of  as  many  as  the  Father  pleaseth,  and  no  more,  doth  consti- 
tute a  peculiar  people,  a  holy  nation,  an  inheritance  of  Christ 
in  the  saints,  an  election  in  the  midst  of  the  redemption. 
Here,  then,  imputation  of  Christ's  work  is  twofold  :  one,  grace 
and  peace  unto  all ;  a  thing  revealed  and  that  may  be  pro- 
claimed, yea,  that  ought  to  be  proclaimed,  unto  all.  The  other, 
regeneration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  union  unto  Christ's  risen  body, 
communication  of  His  glory,  and  fellowship  of  His  kingdom: 
a  thing  not  to  be  preached  unto  all ;  a  secret  thing  belonging 
to  the  Father  ;  which  men  must  be  told  they  have  not  re- 
ceived, but  have  yet  to  receive,  if  the  Father  pleaseth  ;  which 
men  are  to  be  told  God  the  Father  hath  placed  no  interdict 
against  their  receiving,  while  He  hath  continually  revealed 
that  it  is  a  special  gift  and  favour ;  which,  moreover,  men 
cannot  receive  but  in  the  faith  and  use  of  that  common  gift 
which  they  have  all  received  in  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  as  the 
extent  of  this  higher  imputation  resteth  with  the  Father,  and 
is,  indeed,  that  very  right  of  His  which  maintaineth  Him 
Sovereign  in  the  redemption,  first  Originator  there  as  He  is  in 
creation,  yea,  as  He  is  in  the  Godhead  itself;  so  were  I  will- 
ing, and  do  incline  to  believe,  that  nothing  more  ought  to  be 
said  upon  this  subject,  save  that  it  is  the  pleasure  of  the 
Father  to  extend  it  unto  whomsoever  it  pleaseth  Him  to  ex- 
tend it :  and  I  do  rather  think  it  to  be  of  evil  consequence 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        157 

for  men,  by  similitudes  derived  from  the  market-place,  to  say- 
that  there  is  just  so  much  merit  as  will  cover  the  demerit  of 
so  many  persons.  But  into  this  matter  I  enter  no  further ; 
and  having  fairly,  however  lamely,  explained  my  view  of  im- 
putation, the  way  is  now  clear  for  opening  my  views  fully  and 
fairly  upon  the  subject  of  the  reconciliation,  or  atonement. 

Of  the  doctrine  taught  in  the  first  part  of  this  discourse  this  is 
the  sum: — That  there  was  united  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Godhead, 
in  the  person  of  the  Son,  and  the  manhood,  in  its  fallen  state; 
and  that  they  subsisted  together  in  one  person,  in  suchwise  as 
that  He  was  wholly  without  sin,  holy  and  blameless  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Now,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  will  shew  you 
how,  in  this  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  thus  incarnate,  in 
the  fallen,  and  not  the  unfallen  creature,  is  shewn  forth  and 
demonstrated  the  truth  of  that  text — "  God  was  in  Christ  re- 
conciling the  world  unto  hirnself;  not  imputing  unto  them 
their  trespasses."  And  to  make  this  demonstration  the  more 
complete,  I  pray  you  to  look  back  unto  the  beginning. 

See  the  substance  of  mankind,  now  innumerably  divided 
into  living  and  dead  persons,  all  shut  up  and  contained  in 
Adam,  in  a  state  of  goodness  with  which  the  Godhead  was 
well  pleased.  See  it  again,  by  the  fall  of  our  first  parents ;  all 
brought  into  a  state  of  sinfulness,  most  abhorrent  unto  the 
mind  of  a  holy  and  righteous  God ;  offending  all  His  com- 
mandments, refusing  Him  worship,  and  giving  it  unto  stocks 
and  stones,  and  four-footed  creatures,  and  in  all  possible  ways 
shewing  forth  a  most  hideous  and  irreconcilable  enmity  in  the 
creature  unto  God.  The  question  then  is,  How  is  this  enmity 
of  fallen  man  to  be  taken  away  .-*  How  is  the  world  to  be  re- 
conciled unto  God }  How  is  this  sinful  and  sin-possessed 
creature  to  be  delivered,  sanctified,  and  brought  into  favour 
with  God .''  As  in  an  individual,  even  Adam,  the  enmity 
came,  so  in  an  individual,  even  Christ,  the  reconciliation  came. 
And  as  from  the  first  individual  the  enmity  was  propagated  to 
many,  yea,  to  all,  so  from  the  latter  individual  is  the  reconci- 
liation propagated  unto  many.  As  is  the  fall,  so  is  the  re- 
medy. And  how,  then,  was  the  reconciliation  accomplished 
in  the  man  Jesus  Christ  ?  and  afterwards  is  it  propagated  from 
Him  unto  other  men }     In  the  man  Jesus  Christ,  there  was 


1 5  8       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

the  Godhead  of  the  Son,  which  is  the  same  in  substance  with 
the  Godhead  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  There 
was  also  the  manhood  ;  the  same  in  substance  with  the  man- 
hood of  other  men,  otherwise  it  is  not  manhood.  "  Verily,  he 
took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  he  took  on  him  the 
seed  of  Abraham."  "  Forasmuch  as  the  children  are  partakers 
of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the 
same."  Consider  now  attentively  this  the  person  of  Christ. 
If  the  human  substance  which  He  hath  taken  be  of  a  piece 
with  mine  and  with  yours,  as  we  are  all  of  a  piece  with  Adam, 
and  can,  through  the  union  with  the  Godhead,  be  preserved 
pure,  and  blameless,  and  carried  through  death  incorrupt,  and 
brought  into  the  presence  of  God  perfectly  holy,  then  it  is 
made  manifest  that  a  fallen  creature  can  be  reconciled  unto 
God,  for  it  hath  been  done,  it  was  done  in  the  person  of  Christ ; 
and  the  only  question  which  will  remain  is,  How  is  it  to  be 
done  in  other  persons }  How  is  it  to  be  propagated  abroad 
unto  many,  as  Adam's  declension  was  propagated }  But  if, 
on  the  other  hand,  Christ  took  not  our  substance  in  its  fallen, 
but  in  its  unfallen  state,  and  brought  this  unto  glory,  then 
nothing  whatever  hath  been  proved  with  respect  to  fallen 
creatures,  such  as  we  are.  The  work  of  Christ  toucheth  not 
us  who  are  fallen  ;  there  is  no  reconciliation  of  the  fallen  crea- 
ture unto  God  ;  God  is  not  in  Christ  reconciling  a  sinful  world, 
but  He  is  in  Christ  reconciling  an  unfallen  world ;  for  it  is  the 
unfallen  creature  and  the  Godhead  which  have  met  in  Christ. 
And  what  were  the  use  of  reconciling  the  unfallen  world, 
which  hath  no  sin,  which  is  never  fallen  out  with  God }  If 
God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  something  to  Himself,  that  some- 
thing must  be,  in  Christ,  reconciled  with  God.  And  what  is 
there  in  Christ,  but  God  and  man  }  These  two,  that  met  in 
Him  therefore,  and  were  reconciled,  must  be  the  same  two 
between  whom  enmity  had  come.  Do  I  say,  then,  that  Christ 
was  sinful,  or  did  any  sin,  or  that  His  temptations  led  Him 
into  any  sin  .''  If  there  was  sin,  how  could  there  be  reconci- 
liation .''  No  ;  He  was  holy.  But  was  He  liable  to  sin }  Yes  ; 
He  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are.  How  could  He 
be  tempted  like  me,  unless  He  were  like  me  }  His  Godhead 
could  not  be  tempted ;  as  it   is  written,   "  God  cannot   be 


BV  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.       159 

tempted  with  evil."  Only,  then,  His  manhood  could  be 
tempted.  And  how  can  any  one  be  tempted  or  tried,  unless 
he  be  liable  to  sin  }  Even  Adam,  before  he  fell,  was  liable  to 
sin.  If  any  one,  therefore,  say  that  Christ  Avas  not  liable  to 
sin,  he  doth  say  He  was  not  a  man ;  he  doth  say  He  is  not 
come  in  the  flesh  ;  "  for  all  flesh  is  grass,  and  the  glory  of  it  as 
the  flower  of  the  grass  ;"  and  if  any  man  say  that  Christ  is  not 
come  in  the  flesh,  he  is  not  of  God.  "  This  is  that  spirit  of 
antichrist,  whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come,  and 
even  now  already  is  in  the  world."  Be  it  so  then  admitted, 
that  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,  and  was  tried  with  all  our  in- 
firmities, and  tempted  in  all  points,  like  as  we  are — which  is  a 
doctrine  the  most  necessary  to  salvation,  albeit  now  set  light 
by,  nay,  and  even  reproved — you  have  at  once  redemption 
and  reconciliation  made  sure.  You  have  original  sin  taken 
away  in  Him  by  the  manner  of  His  conception.  He  is  not,  as 
it  were,  an  individual  of  the  sinful  individuals ;  He  is  not  a 
human  person  ;  He  never  had  personal  subsistence  as  a  mere 
man  ;  He  sees  the  whole  mass  and  lump  of  fallen,  sinful  flesh; 
He  submits  Himself  unto  His  Father  to  be  made  flesh ;  His 
Father  sendeth  the  Holy  Spirit  to  prepare  Him  a  body.  This 
is  done  through  means  of  a  rational  soul,  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  possessing  doth  therewith  take  up,  from  anywhere  in 
the  lump  of  existing  flesh,  a  part ;  and  when  so  forming  a 
body  the  eternal  Son  of  God  humbleth  Himself  to  apprehend 
it,  for  ever  to  unite  it  to  His  own  Divine  person  ;  and  thus,  by 
creative  act  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  not  by  ordinary 
generation,  Christ  is  constituted  a  Divine  and  human  nature 
in  one  person.  He  hath  taken  part  with  the  children,  with 
the  fallen  children  ;  but  He  came  by  that  part,  not  through 
connexion  with  Adam,  but  by  His  own  free  will,  and  His 
Father's  free  will,  and  the  free  will  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and 
thus  original  sin  is  avoided,  though  yet  the  body  He  took  is 
in  the  fallen  state,  and  liable  to  all  temptations.  Now,  then, 
consider  ye  how  the  reconciliation  between  these  two  most 
contrary  and  irreconcileable  things  is  accomplished.  Most 
people  never  think  at  all  about  the  matter,  and  would  fain  not 
be  troubled  to  think  about  it ;  but  woe  be  to  the  minister,  and 
woe  be  to  the  people  together,  who  are  content  to  lie  sunk  in 


1 60       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

sUch  sloth,  in  such  indifference  to  God's  most  principal  and 
most  glorious  work:  Hear  me,  then,  patiently,  and  give  diligent 
heed,  while  I  explain  to  you  this  matter  distinctly.  The  Divine 
nature  of  Christ  hath  continual  communion  and  identity  with 
the  Godhead,  is  of  the  Godhead,  is  the  Godhead  ;  dwelling  with 
the  Father,  and  in  the  Father,  not  the  less  because  it  acteth 
towards  the  creatures,  through  this  body,  and  through  it  shall 
for  ever  act.  By  His  Divine  nature,  I  say,  with  the  Godhead 
He  transacteth,  and  by  His  human  nature  He  rendereth  the 
will  and  purpose  and  action  of  the  Godhead  intelligible,  visible, 
and  perceptible  to  the  creature.  But  before  two  instruments 
will  render  the  same  harmonious  sound  they  must  first  be 
brought  into  tune  with  one  another;  and  the  question  is, 
How  shall  human  nature,  in  the  fallen  state,  be  brought  to  be 
in  harmony  with  the  acting  of  the  holy  Godhead  .-* '  Ever 
since  the  fall,  God  and  man  have  been  at  variance.  The 
thing  was  not,  that  ever  the  human  will  had  acted  in  harmony 
with  the  will  Divine  ;  and  how  then  is  it  now  to  be  }  How  is 
a  human  nature  to  respond,  truly  and  justly,  in  all  things  to  a 
Divine  nature  .-*  This  is  the  reconciliation  of  which  so  much  is 
made  mention  in  Scripture.  This  is  the  atonement  of  which 
they  make  so  much  discourse,  without  knowing  what  they  say 
or  whereof  they  affirm.  Atonement  is  not  reparation,  is  not 
the  cost  or  damage,  but  the  being  at  one.  It  should  be  pro- 
nounced at-one-ment. 

What  are  the  two  things  to  be  brought  at  one  .-*  Are  they 
not  God  and  sinful  fallen  man  .-'  And  where  are  they  to  be 
brought  at  one,  but  in  the  person  of  Christ,  where  we  have 
them  now  brought  together  without  any  original  sin  ?  If 
human  nature  be  in  itself  so  contrarious,  so  sinful,  so  very 
sinful,  how  shall  it  be  brought  in  Christ  to  tell  truly,  for  ever 
and  ever,  the  mind,  and  will,  and  purpose  of  God  unto  the 
creatures  ?  This  is  the  difficulty  :  solve  me  this,  and  redemp- 
tion and  reconciliation  are  resolved.  It  is  the  work  of  God 
the  Father,  and  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  to  operate  in  and 
upon  the  fallen  humanity  of  Christ,  as  that  it  shall  be  ever 
harmonious  with  the  Godhead  of  Christ.  This  is  what  is 
meant  by  these  words,  "  Thou  hast  prepared  a  body  for  me." 
The  Son  is  willing  to  act  through  a  body :  the  Father  by 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        i6i 

the  Holy  Ghost  expresseth  His  satisfaction  with  His  Son's 
condescension,  by  preparing  that  body,  and  making  it  fit  for 
Him  to  act  through,  so  as  to  open  unto  the  creatures  the 
mystery  of  God ;  and  through  the  body  thus  attuned  unto 
Divine  harmony,  the  Son  doth  humble  Himself  to  act  all 
His  Father's  mind,  all  the  Godhead's  mind.  The  preparing 
of  the  body  is,  I  say,  the  great  work  of  the  Godhead  working 
in  the  person  of  the  Holy  Ghost  :  the  acting  through  it,  what- 
ever pleaseth  God,  is  the  great  work  of  the  Godhead,  in  the 
person  of  the  Son  ;  and  the  effect  is,  God  reconciled  in  Christ 
unto  a  fallen  world. 

It  now  remaineth  to  examine  how  the  Holy  Ghost  bringeth 
the  body  into  this  harmony  with  God.  This  difficulty  must 
be  met  again,  and  not  avoided.  A  sinful  world,  sinners  such 
as  those  around  me,  want  to  know  how  they  are  to  be  recon- 
ciled, how  their  reconciliation  hath  been  accomplished  in 
Christ.  "We  are  in  earnest,  and  we  are  not  to  be  shuffled  out 
of  our  salvation  by  any  subterfuges :  therefore  tell  us  plainly, 
how  this  great  work  was  accomplished."  By  the  grace  of  God, 
I  will  tell  you.  The  Holy  Ghost  took  up  His  residence  in  the 
soul  of  Christ:  God  had  given  the  world  unto  the  devil,  and  the 
devil  had  his  residence  in  the  fallen  world  around.  The  flesh  of 
Christ  was  the  middle  space  on  which  the  powers  of  the  world 
contended  with  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  His  soul.  His 
flesh  is  the  fit  medium  between  the  powers  of  darkness  and 
the  powers  of  light.  And  why  fit .?  Because  it  is  linked  unto 
all  material  things,  devil-possessed,  while  it  is  joined  in  closest, 
nearest  union  unto  the  soul,  which  in  Christ  was  God-pos- 
sessed, in  the  Person  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  His  flesh  is  the  fit 
field  of  contention,  because  it  is  the  same  on  which  Satan 
had  triumphed  ever  since  the  fall.  Here,  then,  in  the  flesh 
of  Christ,  is  the  great  controversy  waged.  Through  this, 
Satan  presented  his  temptations  of  appetite,  of  sight,  of  pride, 
trying  Him  with  the  lust  (desire)  of  the  flesh,  with  the  desire 
of  the  eye,  with  the  pride  of  life.  This  did  he  at  the  very 
outset  of  His  ministry,  not  that  he  had  not  done  it  before, 
or  was  not  to  do  it  after,  or  did  not  do  it  ever,  but  that  it  was 
then  done  in  a  manifest  and  notorious  manner,  that  it  might 
be  capable  of  record  and  of  tradition  ;  and  that  such  dreams 
'      VOL.  V.  L 


1 6 2       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

might  be  prevented  as  I  am  now  reproving,  and  that  it  might 
be  for  ever  manifest  and  indubitable,  that  the  Son  had  no 
favour,  and  that  Satan  had  no  let  or  hindrance  in  this  great 
and  terrible  conflict.  And  when,  at  the  end  of  His  ministry, 
He  said,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  findeth 
nothing  in  me,"  He  solemnly  declareth,  that  during  the  whole 
of  the  fiery  conflict  which  He  had  endured,  and  unto  which 
He  alone  was  conscious,  Satan  had  never  been  able  to  make 
a  lodgment,  or  gain  a  hold  in  His  flesh  ;  that  though  free  to 
come  in  all  his  might,  he  had  ever  been  repelled,  as  he  was 
repelled  in  the  wilderness  ;  that  His  flesh  thus  oppressed, 
thus  hideously  oppressed,  had  never  been  able  to  sway  His 
will,  upholden  in  its  steadfastness  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that 
the  might  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His  soul  had  been  able  to  re- 
concile unto  God  the  inveterate  obstinacy  and  stubborn  re- 
bellion of  flesh  and  blood  ;  that  for  once  the  law  of  the  flesh 
had  not  been  able  to  drag  down  a  soul  unto  perdition  ;  that 
for  once  a  soul  had  been  able  to  draw  up  the  flesh  into  re- 
conciliation with  the  will  of  God  ;  that  all  His  life  long  the 
will  of  the  flesh  had  been  successfully  withstood  by  the  will 
of  the  Spirit,  yea,  that  the  will  of  the  Spirit  had  enforced  the 
flesh  to  do  it  unwilling  service.  All  this  is  signified  by  the 
expression  which  He  used  immediately  before  His  agony, 
"  Satan  cometh,  but  findeth  nothing  in  me."  And  it  is  signi- 
fied, moreover,  that  Satan  was  then  coming  with  an  assault 
of  a  more  dreadful  and  terrible  kind,  which  is  emphatically 
called  "the  hour  and  power  of  darkness  ;"  and  which,  begin- 
ning from  His  agony,  continued  till  His  resurrection,  partly 
without  and  partly  within  the  vail,  partly  in  the  body  and 
partly  in  the  separate  soul,  partly  upon  earth  and  partly,  as 
the  Creed  saith,  in  hell,  understanding  thereby  the  place  of 
separate  spirits.  Which  conflict  being  over,  it  was  pro- 
nounced, not  merely  by  word  of  man,  "  Satan  hath  nothing 
in  me,"  but  it  was  pronounced  by  the  word  of  God,  and  that 
not  by  the  word  of  God  syllableing  airy  sounds  in  the  vault 
of  heaven,  but  by  the  word  of  God  working  through  the  Spirit 
that  change  of  state  which  His  body  underwent  in  the  hollow 
tomb.  Then  indeed,  when  the  Spirit  had  taken  hold  of  the 
body  also,  when  the  Divine  glory  and  holiness  struck  its 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        163 

beams  through  the  body  also  ;  then  when  matter  stood  puri- 
fied by  the  Spirit :  then  when  sinfulness,  and  corruption,  and 
defectibility  forsook  flesh  and  blood,  and  incorruption  and 
immortality,  and  infallibility,  and  holiness  untemptible,  and 
strength  almighty  inhering  and  inhabiting,  shone  forth  in  that 
which  heretofore  had  been  human,  fallible,  temptible  flesh,  it 
was  demonstrated  by  the  finger  of  God,  that  reconciliation 
was  accomplished  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature.  And 
now  was  the  body  prepared,  and  not  till  now  was  the  pre- 
paration of  the  body  accomplished  :  and  through  that  body, 
with  harmony  ever  perfect,  with  variety  of  harmony  infinite, 
with  indubitable  certainty  shall  the  Godhead,  in  the  person  of 
the  Son,  express  through  the  redeemed,  risen,  glorified  man- 
hood, all  its  purposes,  and  accomplish  all  its  effects.  So  that 
the  reconciliation  begun  in  the  Virgin's  womb,  between  God 
and  creation,  is  perfected  in  the  womb  of  the  earth,  is  acknow- 
ledged in  the  height  of  heaven,  is  honoured  of  the  Father,  as 
His  chiefest  work,  with  the  chief  place  of  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  And  thus  do  you  behold  in 
the  resurrection  the  reconciliation  or  at-one-ment  accomplish- 
ed between  God  and  man,  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  through  the  union  of  the  Godhead  to  fallen  humanity. 
Let  us  pause  here,  and  see  what  we  have  attained  unto. 
Of  the  whole  fallen  substance  of  manhood  considered  as  one 
thing  in  Adam  summed  up,  and  in  Adam  assuming  its  pre- 
sent form,  law,  or  condition,  we  have  the  Godhead,  in  the 
person  of  the  Son,  taking  up  a  part,  an  integral  part,  with  the 
same  properties  as  all  the  rest.  And  this  part  is  so  empowered 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  to  be  in  concert  with  the  Godhead 
always,  and  at  length  is  crowned  of  the  Father,  and  seated  on 
the  throne  of  His  majesty.  If  this  had  been  any  favoured  part 
of  the  fallen  material,  then  might  the  law  of  its  redemption 
not  have  applied  to  the  less  favoured  parts.  If  it  had  been 
a  part  that  had  never  fallen,  the  law  of  its  redemption  would 
not  have  applied  at  all  to  the  fallen  substance  of  manhood. 
But  seeing  that  it  was  the  same  of  which  all  the  brethren  are 
partakers,  it  follows  that  what  is  accomplished  in  one  portion, 
is  virtually  accomplished  in  the  whole;  that  reconciliation 
being  made  between  God  and  one  part  of  the  fallen  thing, 


1 64       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

reconciliation  is  made  between  God  and  the  whole  fallen  sub- 
stance. And  therefore  we  may  go  about  and  preach  recon- 
ciliation unto  all  the  world,  as  it  is  in  that  text,  already  quoted, 
"  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not 
imputing  unto  men  their  trespasses."  We  preach  the  resur- 
rection unto  all  who  have  partaken  of  the  death  which  came 
by  Adam.  We  have  a  right  to  say,  that  as  in  Adam  all  have 
died,  so  in  Christ  all  have  been  recovered  from  death,  or  made 
alive.  And  doubt  can  there  be  none,  that  Christ  hath  pur- 
chased unto  Himself  right  and  lordship  over  all  the  fallen 
creatures  ;  and  in  virtue  of  His  resurrection  shall  raise  them 
all  from  their  graves, — some  unto  the  resurrection  of  life,  and 
others  unto  the  resurrection  of  judgment.  His  resurrection 
makes  him  Lord  of  heaven,  and  Lord  of  hell.  He  hath  pur- 
chased back  the  possession,  and  in  doing  it,  He  hath  asserted 
likewise  His  lordship  over  the  usurpers  of  the  possession.  Here 
then  is  redemption  and  reconciliation  purchased  for  fallen 
mankind,  by  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  as  truly  and  completely, 
and  as  extensively  as  in  the  fall  by  one  man,  even  Adam, 
death  and  alienation  were  procured. 

To  make  this  a  little  more  manifest  and  forcible,  it  will  be 
necessary  that  I  speak  here  a  little  concerning  the  two  wills 
or  operations  in  Christ, — a  subject  which  for  several  centuries 
agitated  the  Church.  The  orthodox  doctrine,  and  a  doctrine 
it  is  of  the  most  vital  importance,  holdeth  that  there  were  in 
Christ  two  wills  or  operations,  which  the  Monothelites,  (who 
hold  only  one  will  in  Christ,)  a  class  of  heretics  that  grew  out 
of  the  Eutychean  stem,  denied,  asserting  that  there  was  only 
one  operation,  Theandric  or  Godmanly.  Sergius  proved,  or 
attempted  to  prove,  that  it  was  proper  to  speak  neither  of 
one  nor  of  two  wills  or  operations ;  and  Honorius,  bishop  of 
Rome,  approved  this  course :  but  Sophronius,  patriarch  of 
Jerusalem,  stoutly  maintained  that  one  ought  to  profess  his 
faith  to  be,  that  there  were  two  wills  in  Jesus  Christ ;  which 
dogma  was  confirmed  by  the  Sixth  General  Council  of  Con- 
stantinople, and  the  opinion  of  the  Monothelites  was  con- 
demned by  the  Catholic  Church ; — as  it  hath  likewise  been 
condemned  by  the  Church  of  England,  in  the  acts  of  her 
convocation  ;  and  by  the  Church  of  Scotland,  in  her  general 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.       165 

condemnation  of  the  doctrine  of  Eutyches,  which  these 
single-will  heretics  always  favoured,  as  they  abominated  the 
Council  of  Chalcedon,  in  which  Eutyches  was  condemned. 
Now,  I  am  well  aware  that  the  unbelieving  spirit  of  this  age, 
like  the  Emperor  Heraclius,  will  be  for  imposing  silence  upon 
such  questions  as  unimportant ;  and  I  confess  they  are  alto- 
gether unimportant  to  those  who  see  in  Christ's  work  only 
the  barter  of  so  much  suffering  against  so  much  suffering,  of 
so  much  merit  against  so  much  demerit.  But  to  those,  who 
consider  the  atonement  as  the  deeper  mystery  of  the  recon- 
ciliation of  the  holiness  of  God  to  the  unholiness  of  the  fallen 
creature,  and  the  taking  out  of  the  way  the  law  of  command- 
ments, which  is  the  expression  of  the  enmity  between  God's 
holiness  and  the  fallen  creature,  it  is  a  question  of  the  utmost 
importance,  and  most  necessary  to  the  complete  exposition 
of  the  reconciliation  or  at-one-ment. 

Those  who  say  that  there  is  but  one  will  in  Christ,  either 
make  Him  only  God,  or  only  man.  There  is  the  absolute  will 
of  the  Godhead,  and  there  is  the  limited  will  of  the  creature. 
These  two  may  be  consentaneous  with  one  another,  which  is 
holiness ;  or  they  may  be  dissentient  from  one  another,  which 
is  unholiness  in  the  creature;  but  the  one  cannot  be  the  other 
without  confounding  two  most  opposite  things,  the  Creator 
and  the  creature,  and  introducing  the  doctrine  of  Spinosa, 
the  doctrine  of  Eastern  sophists  and  Western  savans;  that 
God  is  the  soul  of  the  world ;  that  He  is  diffused  through  the 
creatures,  and  that  the  creature  is  of  Him  a  part.  If,  again, 
you  say  with  Sergius,  that  the  operation  in  Christ  is  neither 
Divine  nor  human,  but  a  mixture  of  both,  as  he  called  it, 
Theandric  or  Godmanly,  you  do  confuse  the  two  natures  of 
Christ,  and  make  one  between  them,  which  is  neither  God's 
nature  nor  man's  nature,  but  an  unknown  something  lying 
between  them  both,  with  which  man  hath  no  sympathy,  or 
rather  no  consubstantiality ;  with  which  God  hath  no  consub- 
stantiality,  and,  therefore,  which  cannot  be  Mediator  between 
God  and  man.  This  also  leads  directly  to  the  confusing  of 
the  Creator  with  the  creature,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  and 
therefore  to  everything  evil  besides ;  and  again  bringeth  out 
God  to  be  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  the  world  a  part  of  God. 


1 66       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

It  is  therefore,  however  little  apprehended  by  our  debtor- 
and-creditor  divines,  no  less  than  to  confuse  and  confound 
all  things,  thus  to  permit  such  points  of  doctrine  as  this  to 
remain  in  error,  or  even  under  silence. 

Now  the  orthodox  doctrine  is,  that  there  were  two  wills  in 
Christ  ;  the  one  the  absolute  will  of  the  Godhead,  which  went 
on  working  in  its  infinite  circles,  the  other  a  man's  will,  which 
was  bounded  by  the  limited  knowledge,  the  limited  desires, 
the  limited  affections,  and  the  limited  actions  of  manhood  ;  a 
Divine  nature,  and  a  human  nature,  God  and  man.  The 
orthodox  doctrine  holdeth,  moreover,  that  from  the  incarna- 
tion onwards,  and  for  ever,  the  Son  of  God  never  thought,  felt, 
or  acted,  but  by  condescending  out  of  the  infinitude  of  the 
Divine  will,  into  the  finiteness  of  the  human  will  ;  in  which 
condescension,  the  self-sacrifice,  and  humiliation,  and  grace, 
and  goodness  of  the  Godhead  are  revealed :  without  which 
condescension  these  attributes  of  the  Godhead  could  never 
have  been  known  unto  the  creatures.  This  condescension  it 
is  which  giveth  an  infinite  value  to  every  act  of  Christ, — in  the 
Father's  sight,  inasmuch  as  it  makes  Him  known,  and  obtains 
His  great  purpose  of  self-manifestation ; — in  the  creature's 
sight,  inasmuch  as  it  shews  unto  the  creature  the  great  free- 
will condescension  of  the  Son,  by  which  the  Father  is  made 
known,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  communicated.  Moreover,  the 
attributes  of  thought,  feeling,  and  action,  under  which  the 
Godhead  is  represented  to  us  in  the  Old  Testament,  before 
the  incarnation,  appertain  not  to  the  absolute  will  of  the  God- 
head, which  hath  no  limitation  of  space  or  time,  no  creature 
mind,  nor  creature  will,  but  appertain  to  the  Godhead,  con- 
templating itself  as  about  to  be  united  to  the  manhood  by 
incarnation  of  the  Son  ;  so  that  all  revelation  is  truly  an  anti- 
cipation by  word,  like  as  all  creation  is  an  anticipation  by  act 
of  the  great  thing  which  was  accomplished  by  the  union  of 
two  wills  or  operations  in  Christ ;  or,  to  express  this  truth  in 
Scripture  language,  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  is  the  testimony  of 
Jesus.  It  is  not  to  tell  out  the  truth  fully,  to  say  that  such 
expressions  as  God  changeth,  God  repenteth,  are  accommo- 
dations to  man's  way  of  speaking  :  they  are  anticipations  of 
God's  way  of  shewing  Himself,  by  taking  the  nature  of  man 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        167 

into  the  personality  of  the  Son,  and  through  that  nature  act- 
ing the  purposes  of  the  Godhead  by  the  creatures.  And 
human  language  itself  is  a  great,  and,  next  to  creation,  the 
greatest,  work  of  God  unto  the  same  great  end ;  and  Christ 
the  Creator  is  only  worthy  to  be  expressed  by  Christ  the 
Word.  Be  it  so,  then,  that  unto  every  thought,  word,  and  act 
of  Christ,  there  concurreth  two  operations ;  an  operation  in 
the  infinite  Godhead,  and  an  operation  in  the  finite  manhood  ; 
and  that  these  two  operations  are  not  the  operations  of  two 
persons,  but  of  one  person  only ;  and  what  result  and  infer- 
ence have  you,  but  this  most  sublime,  most  perfect  one,  that 
the  actings  of  the  Godhead,  all  the  volition,  purposes,  and 
actings  of  the  Godhead,  are  consentaneous  with,  are  one  with, 
all  the  volitions,  all  the  actings,  of  the  manhood  of  Christ  ? 
For  the  Godhead  never  acteth  but  by  the  Son  ;  and  the 
Son  never  acteth  unto  the  creatures,  but  by  the  manhood, 
which,  with  His  Godhead,  formeth  one  person.  Wherefore, 
this  sublime,  this  perfect  truth  is  for  ever  incorporated  in  the 
person  of  Christ:  that  Godhead  and  manhood  are  not  in 
amity  merely,  not  in  sympathy  merely,  not  in  harmony  and 
consociation  merely,  but  in  union,  unity,  and  unition,  hypos- 
tatical  or  consubstantial.  I  would  not  give  the  truth  ex- 
pressed in  these  words  of  the  Catechism,  "  Two  distinct 
natures,  and  one  person  for  ever,"  for  all  the  truths  that  by 
human  language  have  ever  been  expressed.  I  would  rather 
have  been  the  humblest  defender  of  this  truth  in  the  four 
oecumenical  councils  of  the  Church  than  have  been  the  great- 
est reformer  of  the  Church,  the  father  of  the  Covenant,  or  the 
procurer  of  the  English  constitution.  But  we  must  bridle 
our  spirit,  and  yoke  our  strength  again  unto  the  argument. 

At-one-ment,  or  reconciliation,  is  a  mere  notion,  figure  of 
speech,  or  similitude,  until  it  be  seen  effected  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  person  of  Christ,  under  these  two  wills  or  opera- 
tions. I  object  not  to  the  similitude  taken  from  paying 
debts,  nor  to  the  similitude  taken  from  redeeming  captives, 
nor  to  the  similitude  taken  from  one  man's  dying  in  the 
room  of  another,  nor  to  any  of  the  infinite  simihtudes  which 
St  Paul  useth  most  eloquently  and  most  fitly  for  illustrating 
and  enforcing  this  most  precious  truth  of  the  at-one-ment,  or 


1 68       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

reconciliation  ;  but  the  similitudes  are,  to  my  mind,  only 
poor  helps  for  expressing  the  largeness,  fulness,  and  com- 
pleteness of  the  thing  which  is  done  by  the  Word's  being 
made  flesh,  and  which  is  exhibited  as  done,  by  the  placing 
of  the  God-man  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high, 
visible  Head,  effective  Ruler  of  the  created  worlds,  and  of 
the  intelligent  creatures  which  possess  them.  This  head 
actor  of  all  things  enacted,  this  being  comprehensive  of  all 
beings  created,  great  fountain  of  life,  full  ocean  of  animation, 
is  in  every  thought,  in  every  act,  God  and  man,  God's  will 
and  man's  will,  in  one  person  united.  Everything,  therefore, 
thence  flowing,  circling  wide  as  creation's  utmost  bound  ; 
every  occurrence,  every  accident,  every  attribute,  every  act, 
every  relation,  every  change,  every  position  which  together 
constitute  the  variety  of  life  in  the  creation  redeemed  and 
ruled  by  Christ,  is  in  very  truth  a  demonstration  of  manhood 
at  one  with  Godhead,  because  it  is  all  thought,  spoken,  and 
done  by  the  Person,  the  One  Person,  who  in  all  His  thoughts, 
words,  and  doings,  is  God  and  man.  What  reconciliation 
like  this  reconciliation,  what  at-one-ment  like  this  at-one- 
ment  ? 

From  this  great  head  of  orthodox  doctrine,  that  there  were 
two  wills  or  operations — the  one  the  absolute  Divine,  the 
other  the  limited  creature  will,  between  which  perfect  unity 
in  one  person  was  preserved,  and  so  reconciliation  between 
God  and  the  creatures  established,  not  upon  the  conditions 
of  a  covenant  merely,  or  by  the  commutation  of  suffering 
merely,  but  by  the  very  being  of  Christ,  and  in  His  being, 
and  in  every  one  of  His  actions,  and  in  all  His  eternal  govern- 
ment, of  all  creation  ; — from  this  only  fit  and  only  sufficient 
demonstration  of  that  atonement  and  reconciliation  which 
the  creature  languisheth,  dieth  to  know  and  be  assured  of, 
even  from  this  truth  of  truths,  the  two  distinct  natures  of  God 
and  man  in  one  person,  Satan,  as  his  custom  is,  hath  de- 
duced one  of  the  foulest  and  most  culpable  heresies  which 
he  hath  ever  at  hand,  to  hinder  fearful  and  ignorant  people 
from  listening  to  the  subject,  and  so  to  remove  them  away 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  hidden  mystery,  and  most  blessed 
consolation  of  the  truth  in  Christ.     The  heresy  to  which  I 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.       169 

allude  is  part  of  the  Borigninian  heresy  against  which  our 
Church  beareth  continual  testimony  in  the  questions  which  she 
putteth  to  every  preacher  before  giving  him  license,  and  again 
before  ordaining  him  over  a  flock.  The  heresy  is,  that  the 
human  will  of  Christ  was  unholy,  or  contradictive  of  the  Divine 
will,  which  is  an  abomination  so  much  to  be  abhorred,  as  the 
truth  of  their  harmony  and  unity  set  forth  above  is  to  be  prized. 
For  the  at-one-ment  or  reconciliation,  effected  by  the  two 
harmonious  consenting  wills,  Divine  and  human,  in  the  one 
person  of  Christ,  would  be  distinctly  and  flatly  denied,  avoided, 
and  destroyed,  if  it  could  ever  be  said  that  the  human  will 
abode  not  in,  and  assented  not  to,  and  set  not  forth,  the  will 
Divine.  The  atonement,  the  redemption,  the  reconciliation, 
standeth  or  falleth  with  the  personal  unity  of  the  two  distinct 
natures  of  Christ.  Now  this  error  cometh  from  the  Nestorian 
stem  which  maintained  two  persons  to  be  joined  together  in 
the  Christ,  harmonising  with  each  other  by  friendship,  con- 
sociation, and  sympathy,  and  not  by  personality:  but  by  what 
manner  of  malice,  by  what  blindness  of  malice,  dare  they  to 
affix  such  a  tenet  upon  the  orthodox,  who  maintain  the  very 
contrary,  and  rest  all  Christian  doctrine  upon  the  contradiction 
of  it }  It  is,  for  I  know  it  well,  because  we  say  and  will  main- 
tain unto  death,  that  Christ's  flesh  was  as  rebellious  as  ours, 
as  fallen  as  ours.  But  what  then  }  is  Christ's  flesh  the  whole 
of  His  creature-being  }  No  :  it  is  His  humanity  inhabited  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  which  maketh  up  His  creature-being.  And, 
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  acting  powerfully  and 
with  effect  to  the  resisting,  to  the  staying,  to  the  overcoming 
of  the  evil  propensity  of  the  fallen  man,  it  is,  that  the  fallen 
manhood  of  Christ  is  made  mighty,  and  holy,  and  good,  and 
every  way  fit  to  express  the  will  of  the  Divinity.  Be  it  known 
unto  these  gainsayers,  that  in  Christ,  and  in  the  soul  redeemed 
by  Christ,  and  in  the  world  redeemed  by  Christ,  we  can  do  as 
ill  without  the  Divinity  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  we  can  without 
the  Divinity  of  the  Son.  We  have  a  fallen  world  to  redeem, 
we  have  the  Son  of  God  to  redeem  it :  but  these  two  must 
not  intermingle  or  be  confused  with  each  other ;  and  there- 
fore, in  order  to  make  that  fallen  creature  harmonious  with 
the  Godhead  of  the  Son,  and  so  to  obtain  one  person,  we 


I  70       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

must  also  have  in  it  the  hfe  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  overcoming 
the  death  of  sin.  Ye  may  be  able  to  state  out  the  redemp- 
tion, without  a  Trinity  of  persons  in  the  Godhead  :  I  lay  claim 
to  no  such  ability.  Your  Trinity  is  an  idle  letter  in  your 
creed  ;  but  it  is  the  soul,  the  life  of  mine.  Your  Christ  is  a 
suffering  God  ;  I  know  it  well :  my  Christ  is  a  gracious,  con- 
descending God,  but  a  suffering  man.  In  your  Christ,  you 
see  but  one  person  in  a  body  :  in  my  Christ  I  see  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  in  a  body.  My  Christ  is  the  Trinity  mani- 
fested ;  not  merely  the  Trinity  told  of,  but  the  Trinity  mani- 
fested. I  have  the  Father  manifested  in  everything  which 
He  doth  ;  for  He  did  not  His  own  will,  but  the  will  of  His 
Father.  I  have  the  Son  manifested,  in  uniting  His  Divinity 
to  a  humanity  prepared  for  Him  by  the  Father;  and  in  mak- 
ing the  two  most  contrary  things  to  meet  and  kiss  each  other, 
in  all  the  actings  of  His  widest,  most  comprehensive  being. 
I  have  the  Holy  Ghost  manifested  in  subduing,  restraining, 
conquering,  the  evil  propensities  of  the  fallen  manhood,  and 
making  it  an  apt  organ  for  expressing  the  will  of  the  Father; 
a  fit  and  holy  substance  to  enter  into  personal  union  with  the 
untempted  and  untemptible  Godhead.  And  who  is  he  that 
dares  stand  up  and  impugn  these  eternal  truths  }  Be  he 
whom  he  may,  the  devil  himself,  with  all  his  legions,  I  will 
uphold  them  against  him  for  ever ;  and  I  will  say  moreover, 
that  in  upholding  these,  I  am  upholding  the  atonement,  the 
redemption,  the  reconciliation,  the  regeneration,  the  kingdom, 
and  the  glory  of  God. 

Doth  any  one  doubt  that  there  was  in  the  flesh  of  Christ  a 
repugnancy  to  suffer,  a  liability  to  be  tempted  in  all  things 
as  we  are  tempted,  and  which  was  only  prevented  from  fall- 
ing before  temptation  by  the  faith  of  His  Father's  promises, 
and  by  the  upholding  of  the  Holy  Spirit  t  Then  I  ask  that 
man.  What  is  Christ.^  a  man  }  No — for  even  unfallen  manhood 
was  disposed  to  fall  into  sin.  A  fallen  man  }  No — for  fallen 
manhood  doth  nothing  but  sin.  A  creature  .-'  No — for  de- 
fectibility  is  the  very  thing  which  distinguisheth  creature  from 
Creator.  What  nature,  then,  hath  He  besides  the  nature  of 
God  .''  None  whatever,  save,  as  these  heretics  hold,  some  pre- 
existent  heavenly  humanity,  which  passed  through  the  virgin 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        171 

unto  the  earth,  as  by  a  canal,  without  partaking  of  her  sub- 
stance. And  then,  to  what  amounteth  the  history  of  His 
hfe?  whereto  serveth  it?  for  imitation,  for  consolation,  for 
assurance  ?  What  model  have  we  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  manner 
of  working  ?  What  proof  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  able  to  pre- 
vail against  the  fallen  creature's  evil  functions ;  what  at-one- 
ment  or  reconciliation  is  there  between  God  and  fallen  creature  ? 
An  at-one-ment  indeed  there  is  between  God  and  this  subli- 
mated and  super-celestial  humanity  of  yours ;  but  what  is 
that  to  me,  who  am  earthly,  sensual,  and  devilish  ?  And 
what  is  Christ's  intercession  to  me,  and  what  His  mediation, 
and  what  my  love  and  obligation  to  Him  ?  for  to  me  it  was 
not  that  He  condescended,  but  to  some  other  creature,  of 
some  other  kind. 

The  whole  life  of  Christ  is  a  demonstration  of  this  one 
thing,  that  the  Second  Person  and  the  Third  Person  of  the 
Godhead,  conjoined,  after  their  proper  modes,  with  the  crea- 
ture, are  able  through  the  creature  to  make  manifest  unto  the 
fallen  creatures,  and  in  the  fallen  creature,  the  manifold  wisdom 
of  God.  His  hunger.  His  thirst,  His  weariness,  His  tempta- 
tion of  Satan,  His  shrinking  from  the  cup  which  His  Father 
gave  Him  to  drink,  His  saying  in  so  many  words,  "  Not  my 
will,  but  thine  be  done,"  His  grief  of  spirit.  His  zeal.  His  sym- 
pathy, His  tears.  His  love.  His  pity.  His  every  affection  and 
action  shew  that  His  flesh  had  the  same,  the  self-same  dis- 
positions and  inclinations  as  the  flesh  of  other  men,  which  yet 
in  Him  were  restrained,  were  withstood,  were  overcome,  at- 
tained not  unto  a  volition,  attained  not  unto  an  action ;  and 
if  they  attained  unto  a  word,  it  was  not  a  word  of  purpose  or 
of  wish,  but  only  a  word  for  our  information,  to  tell  us  that  He 
was  of  our  very  substance,  and  had  the  fellow-feeling  of  all 
our  pains.  And  He  lived  by  faith  as  we  do,  upon  God's 
written  and  recorded  Word  ;  as  Paul  solemnly  declareth,  in  the 
second  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  quoting  from 
the  Old  Testament,  what  occurreth  not  in  one  place,  but  in  a 
hundred  places,  yea,  I  may  say,  wherever  Christ  is  spoken  of, 
"  I  will  put  my  trust  in  Him."  But  is  faith  dishonourable.?  Ye 
fools,  it  is  most  honourable  and  holy.  Doubt  is  that  which 
is  dishonourable  and  sinful.     Now,  like  as  Christ  teacheth  us, 


1 7  2       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

by  His  agony,  how  His  flesh  shrunk  back  in  the  prospect  of 
that  which  it  was  to  endure ;  not  infinite  measures  as  they 
say  of  human  suffering,  but  simple,  single,  human  suffering  ; 
even  so  doth  He  teach  us  by  that  word  which  He  spake  at 
the  grave  of  Lazarus,  how  truly  He  lived  by  faith,  and  how 
desirous  He  was  that  this  great  head  of  doctrine  should  be 
acknowledged  and  believed.  "  Jesus  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and 
said.  Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me ;  and  I 
know  that  thou  hearest  me  always,  but  because  of  the  people 
which  stand  by,  I  said  it,  that  they  may  believe  that  thou 
hast  sent  me." 

I  cannot  here  refrain  from  relieving  and  adorning  this 
argument  by  a  quotation  from  the  letter  of  a  dear  friend, 
whose  thoughts  upon  this  subject  I  wish  he  would  embody  in. 
some  more  lasting  and  enduring  form.  "  To  the  history  of 
the  Lord  himself  let  us  look  for  a  solution  and  an  example. 
When  He  was  tempted,  was  it  not  by  a  thought  of  evil  pre- 
sented to  His  mind  .''  Was  it  not  in  very  deed  consciously 
there .''  Otherwise  the  power  of  temptation  could  never  have 
been  felt,  nor  His  spirit  of  holiness  subjected  to  a  trial.  It 
was  consciously  there,  but  it  had  no  results  : — nerveless  and 
destitute  of  all  creativeness,  it  stood  fixed  in  eternal  loneliness 
and  desolation ; — and  each  that  His  enemy  dared  to  suggest 
to  His  innocent  and  righteous  soul  shared  the  same  immut- 
able doom.  Such  thoughts  were,  however,  by  His  supreme 
dominion  over  them,  productive  of  thoughts  of  a  different 
order  and  nature  :  they  were  the  occasion  of  holy  thoughts, 
which  but  for  them  would  not  have  been  present  to  the 
Saviour's  soul :  still,  however,  they  perished  not, — their  per- 
petuated existence  is  monumental  of  the  Saviour's  triumph. 
And  although  isolated,  neither  creatively,  nor  by  transfusion, 
existing  in  His  mind,  they  did,  as  the  occasion  for  the  mani- 
festation of  His  holy  power  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  con- 
tinue to  modify  the  Saviour's  condition ;  inasmuch  as  He 
thus,  by  the  things  He  suffered,  and  the  things  that  tempted 
Him,  was  taught  obedience,  and  made  perfect.  Now,  from 
this  we  may  most  certainly  learn  the  grand  secret  of  mental 
discipline.  What  was  it  that  enabled  Christ,  instantaneously 
and   for  ever,  to    interpose  an  insuperable  barrier   between 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION,        173 

those  evil  thoughts  suggested  to  Him  by  His  enemy,  in  the 
recorded  temptation,  and  His  own  approved  and  responsible 
meditations  ?  What  but  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  Him  in 
full  and  perfect  measure,  or  rather  without  measure  infinitely? 
There  were  they  fixed,  without  the  possibility  of  transfusion, 
or  commixture  with  kindred  thoughts  ;  for  in  His  mind  there 
were  no  similar  elements,  or  amalgamating  sympathies, — and 
there  they  are  in  eternal  contrast  to  His  lovely  and  holy  re- 
solutions,— truly  existing,  that  all  spirits  may  behold  wherein 
He  triumphed  ;  and,  while  beholding,  may  kindle  into  an  un- 
dying admiration  and  love  of  His  glorious  virtue.  Now  in 
this,  why  should  we  not  imitate  Him  ?  We  cannot  annihilate 
the  indestructible  thought  ;  nor,  like  Him,  so  perfectly  se- 
parate between  the  evil  and  the  good  ;  but  it  is  in  proportion 
to  the  measure  of  faith,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  which 
we  are  partakers  of  a  similar  virtue,  that  we  essay  to  accom- 
plish in  part,  what  in  perfection  He  so  divinely  effected. 
What  He  did  with  all,  we  may  do  with  some ; — and  in  what 
consist  the  ambition,  the  travail,  the  triumph  of  a  believer's 
soul,  since  an  evil  thought  cannot  possibly  be  prevented,  but 
to  check  its  creativeness  of  evil }  In  this  field  Christ  earned 
His  glory  ;  and  in  the  same  field  His  followers  must  struggle 
for  their  crown.  When  so  tempted,  may  the  watch-word  in 
the  decisive  crisis  ever  be,  '  Remember  Christ :  as  He  overcame, 
so  must  /;'  and,  according  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  us,  we 
must  proceed  to  sever  it  from  all  that  follows,  by  calling  from 
the  depths  of  the  soul  the  corresponding  holy  thought,  that 
compunctious  sorrow  nurtured  by  love  for  Christ's  virtue,  and 
anguish  for  want  of  Christ's  perfection.  Oh  never  may  a  thought 
be  suffered  to  pass  without  the  scrutiny  of  our  jealous  souls — 
'  What — whence — whither  art  thou  }  Child  of  the  Spirit,  or 
offspring  of  the  devil .'''  Nor  any  to  remain,  vital  and  crea- 
tive, but  such  as  can  reply, — '  From  God's  own  bosom  I  come, 
to  God's  own  bosom  I  return ;  element  of  undefiled  and  un- 
decaying  blessedness.'  But  in  all  this  let  us  give  God  the 
glory.  In  Him,  and  from  Him,  is  the  beginning  and  the  end 
of  all  perfection ; — in  ourselves,  and  by  ourselves,  evil  will  go 
on  producing  evil  in  continued  succession, — accumulating  all 
variety  of  pollutions  in  the  soul ; — again  I  say  then,  Remem- 


1 74       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

ber  Christ:  think  how  He  overcame:  all  that  He  had,  He 
received  of  the  Father.  Never  let  us  cease,  therefore,  with 
our  heart  and  flesh  to  cry,  that  by  His  Holy  Spirit  He  would 
take  of  the  things  which  He  gave  to  that  blessed  Conqueror  ; 
shewing  us  how  He  toiled  and  triumphed,  that  we,  so  toiling 
and  so  triumphing,  may  be  sharers  of  His  unspeakable  glory." 
We  may  say,  therefore,  that  in  the  flesh  of  Christ,  all  flesh 
stood  represented  ; — that,  in  the  flesh  of  Christ  all  the  infirmi- 
ties, sin,  and  guilt,  of  all  flesh  was  gathered  into  one  ;  and  in 
the  great  triumph  which  the  Godhead  attained  over  the  con- 
federate powers  of  darkness  and  of  wickedness  in  the  holy, 
blameless  life  of  Christ,  that  sin  was  vanquished  and  con- 
demned in  the  flesh,  and  Jesus  became  Lord  of  living  flesh  by 
right  of  redemption;  and  that  He  hath  conveyed  by  His  vic- 
torious life  unto  all  men  a  redemption  from  the  slavery  and 
bondage  of  sin,  which  Satan  had  obtained  for  himself,  and 
over  which  he  held  the  power.  And  to  this  agrees  the  word 
of  the  apostle,  Rom.  viii.  3 :  "  For  what  the  law  could  not  do, 
in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own 
Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh;  and  for  sin  condemned  sin 
in  the  flesh  :"  that  is  to  say,  the  law  could  not  get  the  better 
of  sin ;  and  to  accomplish  this,  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of 
God  was  necessary,  "  not  in  the  likeness  of  angels,  not  in  the 
likeness  of  sinless  flesh,  but  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  or 
as  it  is  in  the  original,  "  in  likeness  of  flesh,  of  sin,  and  about 
sin,"  that  is,  "  with  a  view  to  sin,  condemned  the  sin  in  the 
flesh."  This  having  accomplished,  the  law  was  made  bootless. 
The  law  had  revealed  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  and  proved 
that  when  a  Being  should  come  in  flesh,  and  keep  the  law, 
that  Being  was  more  than  man.  The  law  did  serve  to  estab- 
lish Christ  God,  by  differencing  Him  from  every  other  being 
in  flesh  and  blood  subsisting.  He  took  the  weakness,  He  took 
the  sinfulness  ;  in  one  word.  He  took  the  fallenness  of  flesh ; 
or,  to  use  the  Scripture  language,  "  God  made  Him  sin  for 
us."  And  being  thus  constituted  by  might  of  holiness  Divine, 
He  strangled  the  serpent  in  His  very  cradle,  and  triumphed 
over  him  until  His  death ;  so  that  flesh  is  not  any  more 
heir  to  sin  ;  sin  is  not  any  more  imputed  unto  men.  Our 
infirmities  and  our  diseases  are  borne.     Sin  may  skulk  about 


BY  UNIVERSAL  RECONCILIATION.        175 

us  like  a  condemned  thing,  or  abide  in  us  like  an  imprisoned 
thing;  but  it  hath  no  law  nor  liberty.  We  are  heirs  to  righte- 
ousness, to  justification,  to  power,  as  it  is  written,  "  Him  that 
knew  not  sin  he  hath  made  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  become 
God's  righteousness  in  him."  God's  righteousness,  therefore, 
are  we  become  in  Christ ;  and  if  so,  then  Christ  was  made 
the  offering  for  sin,  and  in  Him  sin  is  swallowed  up,  and  out 
of  Him  floweth  an  everlasting  righteousness,  which  is  called 
God's  righteousness,  because  it  is  the  only  righteousness  God 
accounteth  such.  We  fondly  think  that  there  is  a  righteous- 
ness in  us.  We  fondly  think  that  if  Adam  had  stood,  there 
would  have  been  nothing  but  righteousness,  never  believing 
that  Adam's  fall  was  as  necessary  to  the  bringing  in  of  Christ 
as  Adam's  creation  ; — necessary  for  this  very  end,  of  shewing 
that  there  was,  and  could  be,  no  righteousness  of  God,  but 
that  which  flowed  from  His  own  Son  in  the  creature-form  ; 
and  therefore,  until  He  came,  creation  went  on  plunging 
deeper  and  deeper  into  sin.  Christ  therefore  is  the  fountain 
of  righteousness,  as  He  is  the  fountain  of  everything  else,  and 
thus  He  standeth  unto  the  creatures ;  bright  Sun  of  light,  life, 
purity,  and  goodness.  Moreover,  Christ  was  made  sin  for  us, 
and  weakness  for  us,  and  a  curse  for  us,  that  He  might  be 
able  to  taste  of  death  for  every  man,  and  to  overcome  him 
who  had  the  power  of  death.  Death  proved  the  creature  not 
to  have  life  in  itself;  in  order  that  He  who  had  life  in  Himself, 
might  be  proved  more  than  the  creature,  that  He  might  be 
proved  The  Life.  Satan  had  this  power  over  death  given  to 
him,  that  by  taking  it  from  him  Christ  might  be  proved  the 
more  powerful,  the  living  One.  And  all  men  had  been 
brought  under  Satan's  dominion  of  the  grave,  in  order  that 
by  the  resurrection  of  all  from  the  grave,  Christ  might  be 
demonstrated  Lord  of  all.  Lord  of  life,  the  Resurrection  and 
the  Life.  By  His  death,  moreover,  the  infirmity  of  all  flesh 
died;  and  in  His  resurrection  the  life  of  all  flesh  arose;  and 
in  His  ascension  to  the  right  hand  of  God  flesh  ascended 
above  angels,  and  principalities,  and  powers.  And  in  the 
descent  of  the  Spirit,  God-manhood  bestowed  God's  righte- 
ousness, God's  life  unto  manhood  in  the  flesh  ;  and  thus  in 
Christ  is  God's  glory  unto  the  creature  manifested,  is  God's 


1 76       THE  INCARNA TION—ITS  METHOD : 

glory  in  the  creature  vested,  is  God's  glory  by  the  creature 
communicated,  is  God's  work  through  the  creature  accom- 
plished. And  all  that  was  done  at  creation  by  God,  under 
the  assumed  limitation  of  creature-form,  is  done  over  again, 
or  rather  is  perfected  in  its  doing  by  Christ,  in  whom  that 
assumed  form  was  realised.  And  what  is  the  preaching  of 
Christ }  Is  it  not  even  the  forth-setting  of  Him  unto  all  men  ; 
as  having  wrought  for  all  men  this  unspeakable  redemption ; 
as  having  delivered  flesh  from  the  power  of  sin,  and  from  the 
power  of  death  ;  as  having  purchased  for  us  the  good-will  and 
favour  of  God,  which  we  had  lost  and  forfeited ;  as  having 
attained  unto  the  undisputed  lordship  over  us  ;  as  having  the 
keys  of  hell  and  of  death.  This  is  the  glad  tidings,  this  is 
the  good  news,  this  is  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  this 
is  the  ministry  of  reconciliation  through  the  faith  of  Christ. 
And  when  thus  freely,  fully,  intelligently,  and  unequivocally 
preached,  it  is  that  the  gospel  proveth  to  be  the  power  of 
God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  And  when  this  message  is 
believed,  I  will  now  shew  you  the  standing  into  which  it 
brings  the  creature  unto  God. 

This  unspeakable  and  inestimable  work  of  Christ  in  the 
flesh  for  every  man,  as  it  is  written,  "  That  he,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  should  taste  death  for  every  man  ;"  and  again,  "  Who 
is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  them  that  believe  ;" 
and  again,  "  That  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that 
had  the  power  of  death,  and  deliver  them  who,  through  fear 
of  death,  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage;" — this 
ineffable  benefit  wrought  for  mankind  ;  this  redemption  and 
resurrection  of  its  estate,  all  done,  all  accomplished,  and  all 
freely  presented  unto  the  world  through  Christ,  and  in  Christ, 
is  God's  argument  against  the  argument  of  Satan,  is  faith 
and  hope's  good  against  the  good  of  sense,  is  Christ's  plea 
against  nature's,  made,  and  by  preaching  proclaimed,  unto 
the  four  quarters  of  the  world.  And  wherever  this  is  pro- 
claimed rightly,  men  are  brought  under  the  penalty  of  having 
rejected,  or  under  the  benefit  of  having  received  God's  Christ, 
— of  having  rejected  or  of  having  received  God  himself  And 
now  it  is,  when  the  gospel  hath  been  preached  unto  him,  that 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  177 

man  discovereth  what  is  the  true  dignity  and  use  of  his  rea- 
son,— namely,  for  the  sake  of  weighing  and  deciding  between 
these  two  claimants ;  the  world  as  it  is  seen  out  of  God,  lying 
in  the  evil  one,  and  the  world  as  it  is  believed  by  faith  to  lie 
in  Christ,  the  Holy  One.  Reason  is  able  to  apprehend  the 
good,  as  well  as  the  evil.  The  fallen  man  is  not  one  who 
knows  only  evil,  but  one  who  knows  good  and  evil  :  as  it  is 
written,  (Gen.  iii.  22,) — "  And  the  Lord  said,  Behold,  the  man 
is  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil."  In  Christ 
risen,  having  wrought  His  work,  and  achieved  His  conquest, 
the  good  to  be  perused,  to  be  known,  to  be  believed,  is  held 
up  to  fallen  man.  Blessed  object  of  hope  !  blessed  object  of 
holiness  !  blessed  object  of  all  goodness  !  This  is  our  office 
as  preachers  and  ministers  of  the  reconciliation,  to  hold  it  up 
before  you,  to  lay  it  open  unto  your  various  faculties  of  de- 
sire, of  hope,  of  faith,  to  instate  you  in  the  possession  of  it  by 
sacramentary  seals,  to  enfeoff  you  in  its  holiness  with  sacra- 
mental washing  of  water,  to  enfeoff  you  in  its  bodily  sub- 
stance, with  bread  and  wine,  and  in  every  possible  way  which 
human  wisdom  can  devise  to  secure  man  in  the  assurance 
that  Christ's  reconciliation  and  redemption  is  as  truly  the 
common  inheritance  of  the  race,  and  will  as  truly  be  proved 
so  by  the  resurrection  of  all,  as  sin  is  proved  to  be  the  com- 
mon inheritance  of  the  race,  by  the  death  of  all. 

Thus,  then,  men  are  brought  into  a  strait  between  two. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  devil's  world  of  sight,  dressing  out  to 
them  its  blessedness,  its  dignity,  its  heaven  :  on  the  other 
hand,  Christ's  "  world  to  come,  the  habitable  world  to  come, 
whereof  we  speak,"  (Heb.  ii.  5,)  dressing  out  to  them,  by  the 
minister's  voice,  its  true  blessedness,  its  true  dignity,  its 
true  heaven,  to  be  enjoyed  and  possessed  after  the  re- 
surrection. Both  these  worlds,  Satan's  and  Christ's,  are  cap- 
able of  being  known  and  apprehended  by  every  man  ;  but  the 
knowledge  and  apprehension  of  a  thing  is  not  the  posses- 
sion of  it.  Reason,  God's  creature,  unto  which  Christ  is  ad- 
dressed by  the  preacher,  even  as  Christ  in  flesh  was  addressed 
unto  sense,  likewise  God's  creature  ;  reason,  being  thus  dealt 
withal,  straightway  discovereth  the  bondage  of  the  will.     She 

would  put  forth  her  hand  and  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and 
VOL.  V.  M 


I  *]^       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD : 

eat  and  live  for  ever.  But  she  findeth  that  she  cannot ;  and 
if  we  preach  no  more  than  this  reconcihation,  we  would  agonise 
men,  and  not  bless  them.  We  see  it,  we  would  possess  it,  but 
the  devil  is  too  mighty  for  us.  Then  he  saith,  Cast  yourselves 
upon  God,  for  that  help  which  you  truly  need.  He  sent  not 
His  Son  to  tantalise,  nor  yet  to  agonise,  but  to  bless  and  save 
you.  You  have  apprehended  those  good  things  that  are  in 
Christ,  even  life  and  immortality ;  that  is  God's  argument  for 
you  to  trust  in  Him.  He  hath  sent  out  His  Son,  in  reason's 
form  arrayed,  with  man's  perfectibility  and  with  man's  perfec- 
tion, as  His  boon  to  man,  in  order  that  thou,  O  creature  man, 
might  know  how  merciful  a  Creator  thou  hast,  how  good,  how 
gracious ;  and  that  thou  mightest  bless  Him  for  the  reason 
thou  possessest  to  apprehend  these  things — for  the  capacities 
thou  possessest  to  inherit  them — for  the  inheritance  itself,  for 
the  life  itself,  which  now  is  brought  out  unto  thee,  from  the 
purpose  of  the  eternal,  in  the  person  of  Christ.  Thou  sayest 
truly,  that  there  is  a  mighty  work  yet  to  do.  That  work  is 
with  the  Father ;  and  if  thou  wilt  not  trust  the  Father  to  do  it 
— Him  who  is  thy  rightful  Creator,  and  who  now  hath  mani- 
fested Himself  thy  reconciled  Father,  if  thou  wilt  not  trust — 
then  assuredly  thou  art  proved  twice  dead,  twice  rebellious. 
To  thee  Christ  hath  indeed  died  in  vain.  Thou  preferrest 
present  death  and  future  resurrection  unto  judgment  and 
eternal  death ;  thy  perdition  thou  preferrest  to  the  Creator's 
authority  and  a  Father's  love.  Thou  tramplest  upon  Christ, 
whom  He  hath  sent,  and  in  whom  He  hath  vested  all  power, 
visible  and  invisible.  Thou  shalt  be  brought  up  to  judgment 
out  of  thy  grave,  by  the  voice  of  Him  whom  now  thou  wilt 
not  hear ;  and  by  virtue  of  His  death  thou  shalt  receive  power 
of  resurrection,  and  shalt  bear  up  in  thyself  through  eternity 
the  righteousness  and  justice  of  His  lordship,  as  the  blessed 
shall  bear  up  the  grace  and  mercy  of  the  same.  Thus  it  is^ 
holy  brethren,  that  the  universal  reconciliation  which  Christ's 
death  hath  wrought,  and  the  universal  restoration  unto  life 
which  His  resurrection  hath  wrought,  instead  of  being  the 
support  of  universal  salvation,  is  the  support  of  universal  right 
and  lordship  over  all  the  creatures,  which  for  the  present  doth 
constitute  the  world  in  Him  to  stand,  and  for  Him  obligated 


B Y  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  1 79 

unto  the  Father ;  and  hereafter  shall  constitute  the  world  in 
two  estates,  of  eternal  and  infallible  blessedness,  or  eternal 
and  unchangeable  misery — the  one  in  virtue  of  His  lordship 
honoured,  the  other  in  virtue  of  His  lordship  dishonoured ; 
the  one  vessels  unto  honour,  the  other  vessels  unto  dishonour. 
Seeing,  then,  dearly-beloved  brethren,  that  there  is  felt 
within  the  mind  of  every  man  an  inability  to  lay  hold  upon 
and  lift  himself  into  the  ark  which  Christ  hath  certainly 
builded  for  the  Avorld's  life  ;  seeing,  likewise,  that  this  in- 
ability is  constantly  foretold  and  anticipated,  in  the  sepa- 
rate states  of  heaven  and  hell ;  I  ask  by  what  name  is 
this  power  to  be  called  which  God  hath  reserved  with 
Himself,  of  empowering  the  rational  man,  thus  instructed  by 
Christ  to  believe,  delight  in,  and  follow  these  instructions,  and 
so  honour  the  Lord  of  all,  rather  than  to  obey  the  great  enemy 
of  souls,  debase  his  reason,  disallow  Christ,  and  renounce  the 
eternal  God,  from  whom  He  came  ?  By  what  name,  I  say,  is 
this  hidden  and  secret  thing  to  be  called,  but  the  will  of  the 
Father,  the  unrevealed,  unknown,  unconditional  will  of  the 
Father?  And  this  is  what  election  hath  to  do  with.  Election 
is  the  acting  of  this  will  unto  an  individual;  and  election 
essentially  implies  the  acting  of  this  will  upon  an  individual. 
Redemption  is  the  acting  of  God's  will  unto  all ;  but  election 
is  the  choosing  of  some  one,  or  some  ones  from  the  all.  When 
we  preach  redemption,  therefore,  we  preach  unto  the  common 
race  the  undoing  of  the  fall,  the  reducing  of  the  creature  under 
Christ,  the  manifestation  of  His  work  in  purchasing  the  crea- 
ture. It  is  virtually  the  shewing  forth  of  Christ,  as  the  basis, 
the  support,  the  bulwark,  the  security,  of  creature-being.  In 
one  word,  it  is  preaching  the  manifest  God.  But  when  we 
preach  election,  we  stand  upon  the  vantage  ground  of  this 
manifested  grace,  love,  right,  and  power  of  the  Godhead,  and 
speak  to  persons,  not  to  communities  ;  and  we  say,  Now  thou, 
brother,  who  knowest  and  acknowledgest  this  work  of  Christ, 
but  feelest  that  still  thou  lackest  power  to  submit  thyself  unto 
Him,  seek  this  which  thou  lackest  from  the  Father.  Go  thou 
in,  and  use  Christ  as  thy  Mediator.  Acknowledge  the  Father's 
will,  make  known  to  Him  thine  own  sense  of  poverty  and 
weakness.      Shew  to  Him  how  thou  wouldest   fain   glorify 


1 80       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

Christ,  by  a  life  of  acknowledgment  to  Him,  if  thou  couldest ; 
but  thou  canst  not,  except  the  Father  draw  thee.  Take  unto 
thyself  the  confidence  of  a  behever  in  Christ,  to  ask  in  the 
name  of  Christ  what  thou  needest.  Thus,  with  all  the  desire 
and  confidence  which  the  gospel  hath  inspired  thee  with,  sus- 
pend thyself  upon  the  Father,  and  in  so  doing  thou  dost 
acknowledge  His  right  of  election.  Oh,  how  important  is  this 
matter  whereof  I  am  now  discoursing !  The  Lord  give  me 
goodly  words.  There  is  not  such  a  madness  as  for  a  man  to 
resist  election.  It  is  Satan's  own  expedient,  to  blast  redemp- 
tion, and  to  destroy  the  dignity,  the  nobility  of  a  person,  of  a 
single  soul. 

To  talk  of  conditional  election,  is  the  most  egregious  folly, 
the  most  entire  rejection  of  Christ ;  the  most  wilful  insurrec- 
tion against  the  Father.  First,  to  ask  a  condition  over  and 
above  what  is  contained  in  Christ's  work,  is  to  disannul  that 
work,  and  to  say  to  the  "  Father,  Thy  grace  is  not  yet  enough  ; 
I  cannot  trust  Thee  yet."  What  a  speech,  what  a  thought  for 
a  creature !  But  what  an  awful  speech,  what  a  hideous  thought 
for  a  creature  who  believeth  in  redemption,  who  seeth  the 
grace  of  God  in  Christ,  and  will  not  trust  Him!  Secondly, 
What  a  defeat  of  Christ,  what  a  renunciation  of  His  work, 
which  was  nothing  else  but  that  He  might  obtain  trust  for  His 
Father !  Talk  to  me  of  receiving  Christ,  and  not  believing  in 
unconditional  election!  You  know  not  what  you  say.  Talk 
to  me  of  living  in  doubt  of  this,  and  yet  living  by  faith  I 
The  thing  is  impossible.  If  you  be  living  in  the  honour  of 
Christ,  you  must  be  living  in  the  honour  of  Him  that  sent 
Him  ;  and  surely  you  will  not  be  making  conditions  with 
your  Creator,  if  you  are  honouring  Him.  Moreover  you  are 
making  shipwreck  of  your  own  dignity ;  I  may  say,  de- 
stroying your  own  personality,  and  sinking  yourself  in  the 
community  of  the  reconciled,  if  you  thus  make  light  of 
election, — for  the  reconciliation  is  common  unto  many,  but 
the  election  is  peculiar  unto  one.  No  one  can  think  of  elec- 
tion without  thinking  of  himself;  no  one  can  believe  in  elec- 
tion without  contemplating  God  as  transacting  with  himself 
This  is  the  true  ground  of  a  personal  interest  in  Christ ;  and 
where  this  is  not  in  estimation,  there  may  be  social  and  eccle- 


BY  PAR TICULAR  ELECTION.  1 8 1 

siastical  religion,  but  personal  there  will  be  none.     All  digni- 
ties put  together  are  nothing  to  this  dignity  of  being  regarded 
and  beloved  by  God.     What  will  deliver  you  from  priestcraft 
from  ecclesiastical  domination,  from  the  fashion  of  the  reli- 
gious world,  from  public  opinion,  is  to  come  into  communica- 
tion with  God,  not  upon  the  common  ground  of  redemption 
merely,  but  upon  the  private,  peculiar,  and  personal  ground 
of  election  also.     This  is  what  will  remove  you  from  being  an 
atom  in  a  mass  composed  of  many  atoms,  and  make  you  to 
become  an  individual  capable  of  assimilating  individuals  to 
yourself,  and  having  in  yourself  an  integral  individual  life. 
This  is  what  makes  every  stone  of  the  temple  a  living  stone ; 
this  is  what  makes  every  member  of  Christ  alive  ;  this  is  what 
constitutes  the  vitality  of  the  Church,  and  differenceth  be- 
tween a  papal  mass,  a  religious-world  mass,  and  a  living  body 
of  living  members.     In  one  word,  wherever  this  doctrine  of 
election  hath  been  duly  prized  by  any  church,  as  by  the 
Church  of  Scotland,  and  by  the  Church  of  England  until 
the  days  of  Laud,  it  hath  stirred  up  the  might  of  men  as 
individuals,  and  delivered  them  from  the  lethargic  corruption 
of  aggregate  masses.     And  to  this  it  is,  far  more  than  to  all 
causes  put  together,  that  the  children  of  the  Scottish  Church 
have  so  much  individual  prowess,  and  individual  success,  in 
all  parts  of  the  world  ;  because  the  personal  hath  been  culti- 
vated in  them,  by  the  constant  recognition  of  this  doctrine  of 
election,  while  the  principle  of  community  hath  been  pre- 
served by  the  doctrine  of  the  redemption, — into  which,  how- 
ever, they  have  not  generally  so  much  insight,  nor  so  much 
liberty  of  declaring  it,  as  they  have  into  the  former.     In  one 
word.  Is  the  invisible  Godhead  to  have  a  place  in  our  creed, 
or  is  it  not }     If,  as  all  Scripture  teacheth,  the  invisible,  in- 
comprehensible Godhead  hath  the  chiefest  place  in  our  faith, 
being  the  great  object  of  our  worship,  then  must  election 
have  the  principal  place  in  our  creed,  as  representing  the 
intercourse  between  the  soul  and  the  invisible,  incomprehen- 
sible God.    Is  the  unseen  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  where- 
by the  invisible  God  communicates  His  invisible  actings  to  the 
invisible  soul,  to  have  a  place  in  our  creed .?  that  is  to  say, 
are  we  to  hope  for  special  manifestations  and  revelations  of 


1 8  2       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

the  Spirit  ?  Are  we  to  know  God  as  our  God,  to  be  taken 
into  His  pavilion,  and  to  be  filled  with  His  love  ?  are  we  to 
enjoy  raptures,  and  seizures,  and  solitary  sequestered  enjoy- 
ments of  the  Divine  presence,  with  which  no  other  inter- 
meddleth  ?  then  must  election  stand,  for  election  doth  name 
that  particular  operation  of  God's  Spirit  which  one  only  can 
partake  of,  by  himself,  and  in  himself,  though  he  may  be  able 
to  communicate,  and  tell  somewhat  of  the  same,  for  the  en- 
couragement of  his  brother.  These  two  great  doctrines, — the 
commonness  of  the  redemption,  the  personality  of  the  elec- 
tion, do  stand,  and  prop  each  other  up  :  they  can  only  stand 
together,  and  where  they  are  not  maintained  with  equal  foot, 
evil  betideth  both.  The  former  without  the  latter  degene- 
rates into  universal  salvation ;  the  latter  without  the  former 
degenerates  into  blind  and  absolute  fate,  partiality,  or  favour- 
itism. But  where  the  two  are  held  fast,  they  become  the  two 
poles  upon  which  the  goodness,  and  beauty,  and  solidity  of 
the  Divine  purpose  revolve. 

The  harmony  and  mutual  support  of  these  two  great  prin- 
ciples is,  however,  so  little  understood,  and  in  this  day  there 
is  so  great  a  tendency  to  creeds  of  one  article  only,  that  I 
deem  it  good  to  open  this  point  a  little  further.  The  redemp- 
tion, which  is  the  work  of  the  Godhead  in  Christ,  done  for 
the  glory  of  Christ,  and  for  the  bringing  of  all  things  under 
Him ;  this  work  securing  to  mankind  unspeakable  benefits, 
done  for  us  by  the  Godhead,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  doth 
draw  the  soul  unto  the  Father,  whose  love  and  goodness  have 
thus  been  expressed  by  His  Son.  I  say  not  that  the  redemp- 
tion, as  it  in  itself  afiecteth  a  human  soul,  can  work  any  such 
sense  of  the  Divine  goodness  as  will  overcome  the  natural 
alienation  of  the  fallen  man  ;  but  that  there  is  enough  in  that 
which  is  in  Christ  revealed,  and  by  the  fallen  man  may  be 
apprehended,  to  place  every  one  beyond  all  excuse,  in  not 
drawing  near  unto  God  with  confidence,  and  with  assurance 
of  hope  to  receive  strength  from  His  own  Almighty  hand. 
When  the  soul,  thus  taught  concerning  the  Father  by  Christ, 
doth  commit  her  case  unto  the  Father,  she  is  acting  faith 
upon  the  invisible  and  unrevealed  purpose  of  election ;  she 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  183 

hath  cast  herself  upon  the  absolute  will  of  God ;  she  hath 
taken  His  encouragement ;  she  hath  accepted  His  grace,  and 
cast  herself  wholly  upon  His  care ; — in  all  which,  she  proceeds 
by  the  way  of  the  revelation  of  Christ ;  and  to  the  end  of 
being  enabled  to  acknowledge  and  to  glorify  Christ,  making 
Him  the  way  unto  the  Father,  the  Mediator  between  God  and 
man.  Now,  this  acknowledgment  of  God's  sovereignty  ex- 
presseth  itself,  first,  in  a  firm  faith  of  that  deliverance  which 
He  hath  given  us  in  Christ ;  deliverance  from  the  curse  of  the 
law ;  deliverance  from  a  burdened  conscience  ;  deliverance 
from  the  fear  of  God's  wrath :  and,  secondly,  it  proceeds  in  a 
good  hope  that  the  same  most  gracious  God  will  communi- 
cate unto  us  the  benefits  of  Christ's  resurrection,  which  are, 
regeneration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  powers,  desires,  and 
affections  of  the  renewed  man.  This  good  hope  we  entertain, 
not  as  the  reward  or  price  of  our  faith,  but  as  the  continuance 
of  that  honour  and  glory  which  the  Father  hath  vested  in  His 
own  Son ;  that  power  of  an  endless  life,  that  unchangeable 
priesthood  which  He  hath  received  for  the  sake  of  all  the 
Father's  elected  ones, — in  one  word,  that  power  which  He 
hath  received  from  the  Father  since  He  ascended  up  on  high. 
To  those,  indeed,  who  have  been  baptized,  this  hope  of  a 
thing  to  be  possessed  is  changed  into  the  assurance  of  a  thing 
possessed.  The  baptized  should  believe  that  he  hath  re- 
ceived the  Holy  Ghost,  and  go  about  the  works  of  the 
Church  as  one  who  hath  received  power  from  on  high ;  and 
the  Church  expecteth  him,  like  a  good  soldier,  who  hath 
received  his  outfit  and  his  armour,  and  his  charges,  to  resist 
the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh.  A  baptized  person  ought 
never  to  doubt  of  his  election,  but  go  on  to  make  his  calling 
and  election  sure  ;  the  very  intention  of  a  church  being  to  re- 
present the  election.  So  that  a  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ 
is  beholden  to  believe  in  the  election  of  the  Father,  no  less 
than  in  the  redemption  of  the  Son  :  and  his  labour  ought  to 
be  to  stir  up  the  spirit  that  is  in  him,  which  was  given  him  in 
the  holy  sacrament  of  baptism ;  as  the  name  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  named  over  him,  so  is  he 
a  witness  for  the  offices  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.     Morever,  a  believer  in  the  Father's  sovereignty, 


1 84       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

one  who  is  willing  to  take  his  standing  under  the  purpose  of 
election,  doth  acknowledge  the  same,  by  a  continual  resigna- 
tion unto  the  Father's  will,  both  in  providence  and  in  grace. 
In  providence,  which  becometh  grace  the  moment  it  is  re- 
cognised as  proceeding  from  a  Father, — and  therefore  I  rather 
make  use  of  than  sanction  the  distinction, — he  seeth  the  ab- 
solute and  inscrutable  will  of  God,  opening  and  disclosing  itself 
unto  him  personally ;  and  being  a  worshipper  of  that  absolute 
will,  and  a  believer  in  election,  he  murmureth  not,  complaineth 
not,  but  yieldeth  unto  God,  and  so  honoureth  the  great  name 
of  God.     This  is  the  renewed  will  of  the  believer  worshipping 
the  absolute  will  of  God.     This  is  the  true  imitation  of  Christ, 
who  ever  said,  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."     This  is 
the  practical  acknowledgment  of  God's  sovereignty  over,  and 
His  propriety  in  us,  to  do  with  us  what  seemeth  to  Him  good. 
Besides  this,  the  believer  in  God  the  Father's  absolute  decree 
of  election  doth  further  resign  himself  unto  the  will  of  God  in 
grace, — that  is,  in  experiences  purely  spiritual, — as  well  as  in 
providence,  being  content  with  that  measure  of  the   Holy 
Spirit  which  the  Father  may  please  to  apportion  unto  him 
being  content  with  that  office  in  the  body  of  Christ  which  the 
Father  may  assign  to  him,  being  content  with  that  post  in 
the  field  of  combat  with  Satan  where  the  Father  may  station 
him.       If  under  hidings  of  the   Father's  countenance,  still 
patient,  and  waiting  for  the  light  thereof,  as  they  that  watch 
for  the  morning ;  if  under  famine  of  the  bread  of  life,  or  under 
the  ministry  of  error,  and  far  removed  from  the  fellowship  of 
true  saints,  and  fallen  amongst  false  brethren,  still,  not  the 
less  resigned  unto  the  disposal  of  God,  honouring  the  great 
Head  of  the  Church,  and  standing  fast  in  the  communion  of 
the  saints;  the  entire  work  of  the  Spirit  is  the  fruit  of  resigna- 
tion unto,  and  dependence  upon,  the  invisible  God,  upon  the 
absolute  decree  and  unrevealed  will  of  the  Father.     No  man 
can  receive  the  Spirit,  merely  by  believing  upon  the  redemp- 
tion of  Christ ;  for  the  Spirit  proceedeth  not  from  the  Son 
only,  but  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.     By  the  redemption 
of  Christ,  we  must  be  carried  upward  and  inward  unto  the 
Father,  from  whose  bosom  Christ   came  forth  ;  and  in  the 
act  of  worshipping  Him,  and  resigning  ourselves  unto  Him, 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  185 

whose  grace  hath  appeared  in  Jesus  Christ,  we  do  receive  the 
seal  of  the  Spirit,  because  we  have  known  and  acknowledged 
both  the  Father  and  the  Son,  from  whom  the  Spirit  pro- 
ceedcth  forth. 

Therefore  I  say,  that  to  the  behef  of  Christ  manifest  in  the 
flesh  must  be  added  the  belief  of  the  Father's  inscrutable  de- 
cree of  election  before  the  Spirit  can  be  received.  Now  it  is 
no  objection  to  this  to  say,  that  many  who  have  not  been  able 
to  enter  into  the  absolute  decrees  of  God  do  yet  seem  to  possess 
the  Spirit.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  a  man's  faith 
and  his  own  interpretation  of  his  faith.  Many  who  profess  to 
abhor  the  absolute  decrees  of  God,  are  not  the  less  believers 
therein,  and  actors  thereon,  though  they  wot  it  not,  for  they 
believe  in  free  grace, — that  is,  God's  undeserved  favour  unto 
miserable  helpless  sinners.  But  how  can  it  be  free,  otherwise 
than  as  it  dependeth  upon  God's  will }  If  it  depend  upon 
something  in  us,  conditional  thereto,  then  where  is  its  free- 
dom .''  Moreover,  they  believe  that  God  apprehendeth  us,  and 
not  we  Him.  And  if  the  origination  of  the  work  is  with  God, 
what  can  originate  it  but  an  act  of  His  own  will,  absolute  and 
inscrutable  .''  They  believe,  moreover,  that  without  the  work 
of  the  Spirit,  the  work  of  Christ  cannot  save  any  one  ;  and  unto 
whom  doth  the  giving  of  the  Spirit  appertain  ?  Is  it  ours  to 
draw  Him  down  }  or  is  it  the  Father's  to  bestow  Him  .>*  Not 
ours  to  draw  Him  down,  but  the  Father's  to  bestow  Him;  and 
is  not  this  again  another  acknowledgment  of  the  Father's 
sovereign  and  arbitrary  will .-'  Moreover,  what  is  prayer  unto 
the  invisible  God,  through  the  manifest  God,  but  a  continual 
rising  through  the  visible  Christ,  into  the  invisible  Father,  and 
a  constant  acknowledgment  of  His  primary  place  and  originat- 
ing power  in  every  particular  personal  gift  which  proceedeth 
through  Christ .-'  So  that  you  perceive  how  all  believing, 
praying  Christians  are  in  the  daily,  hourly  practice  of  both 
acknowledging  and  occupying  this  greatest  sphere  of  Divine 
truth,  which,  in  contradistinction  to  the  manifested  redemp- 
tion, we  name  election,  free  choice,  sovereign  will,  the  uncon- 
ditional decree  of  God.  And  we  therefore  come  back  to  our 
declaration,  that  the  work  of  the  Spirit  proceedeth  exactly  in 
proportion  as  we  know  what  in  Christ  is  all  revealed  unto 


1 86       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

knowledge,  and  submit  unto  the  Father  all  beyond  which  con- 
cerneth  His  glory,  the  glory  of  His  Son,  our  being,  and  the 
being  of  other  men.  Therefore,  whosoever  would  have  the 
Spirit  in  a  great  and  plentiful  measure,  must  be  covetous  of 
knowledge  and  unwearied  in  prayer ; — knowledge  being  the 
worship  of  Christ,  and  ignorance  the  denial  of  Him ;  prayer 
being  the  worship  of  the  hidden  Father,  and  the  neglect  of 
prayer  being  the  denial  of  Him.  But  wherever  all  that  is  re- 
vealed in  Christ  is  diligently  searched  into  ;  not  shrunk  from, 
but  known,  possessed,  and  delighted  in.  Wherever  the  un- 
known of  things  and  of  being  is  reverently  and  humbly  com- 
mitted unto  the  Father  by  faithful  prayer,  it  cometh  to  pass 
without  fail,  that  the  Spirit  proceedeth  upon  such  a  one,  to 
assure  his  soul  with  respect  to  things  uncertain,  to  comfort 
him  with  respect  to  things  afflictive,  to  enlighten  him  with 
respect  to  things  that  may  be  known,  and  to  increase  his  faith 
with  respect  to  things  which  cannot  be  known  ;  to  enliven 
hope  with  respect  to  things  promised,  to  quicken  desire  to- 
wards things  good,  and  to  strengthen  abhorrence  of  things 
evil ;  to  increase  patience  of  this  estate  of  trial,  and  in  general 
to  remedy  the  defects  of  sight,  and  to  comfort  under  the  priva- 
tions and  oppressions  of  sense.  So  that  the  Spirit  is  the  seal 
of  the  Father's  election;  the  baptism  proceeding  from  the  risen 
Son.  As  Christ,  having  wrought  out  the  redemption,  did,  upon 
His  ascension  into  glory,  receive  from  the  Father  the  promise 
of  the  Spirit,  which  now  He  dispenseth,  not  to  all,  but  only 
to  the  elect  of  God ;  so  we,  believing  in  the  work  of  Christ 
unto  the  resurrection,  do  receive  that  common  redemption  by 
which  He  purchased  the  world  back  from  sin  and  Satan  ; 
but  by  passing  with  Him  into  the  invisible,  and  believing  on 
Him  as  the  exalted  One  of  God,  receiving  the  secret  purposes 
of  the  Father,  through  fellowship  of  the  Godhead,  that  He 
may  communicate  them  unto  the  Father's  elect  ones,  through 
fellowship  of  their  manhood.  Thus  believing,  I  say,  in  the 
invisible  power  and  privilege  of  Christ,  we  do  in  fact  believe 
in  the  Father  whose  powers  He  hath  received  to  execute  : 
and  so  believing,  we  are  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 

And  thus,  dear  brethren,  you  have  a  more  full  and  com- 
plete view  of  the  several  parts  which  the  Persons  in  the  God- 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  187 

head  do  together  bear  in  the  method  of  our  salvation  ; — the 
Father  sending  forth  the  Son,  to  reveal  whatever  the  creature 
can  know  concerning  God  ; — the  Son  revealing  the  same, 
with  the  single  object  of  glorifying  the  invisible  Father,  from 
whom  He  proceedeth  forth,  and  calling  upon  all  men,  by  the 
common  gift  so  generously  bestowed,  to  trust  in  and  rely 
upon  the  Father  for  something  further  which  remaineth  to 
be  wrought  in  each  one  of  us  by  the  Spirit  whom  He  will 
send  ; — the  Spirit  coming  unto  as  many  as  have  known  the 
Son,  and  arc  trusting  in  the  Father  to  perfect  that  work  of 
our  salvation  which  the  Persons  of  the  Godhead  have  under- 
taken, and  to  seal  the  heirs  of  glory  until  the  day  of  redemp- 
tion, who,  as  they  receive  that  precious  Spirit,  do  grow  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  yea,  have  the  Father 
and  the  Son  abiding  in  them,  in  the  person  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Wherefore  I  exhort  you  all  to  give  yourselves  up 
unto  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  unto  the  worship  of  the 
invisible  Father,  that  ye  may  receive  the  inward  assurance 
and  blessedness  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

In  these  times  I  do  discern  such  a  narrowness  of  spirit,  and 
what  I  would  call  systematic  ignorance  prevailing  in  the 
Church,  and  especially  such  an  unwillingness  to  admit  the 
one  or  the  other  of  these  two  great  sustaining  principles,  the 
universality  of  the  reconciliation  and  the  particularity  of  the 
election,  that  I  cannot  yet  take  leave  of  the  subject  without 
shewing  how  thoroughly  they  are  interwoven  in  the  doctrine 
of  a  Trinity,  in  the  work  of  incarnation,  in  the  very  being  of  a 
Church.  This  is  the  distinction  between  the  principle  of  re- 
conciliation and  the  principle  of  election  :  that  all  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  did,  up  to  the  resurrection.  He  did  for  mankind  in 
general ;  but  that  all  that  He  hath  done  since  the  resurrection. 
He  doth  in  order  to  make  a  difference,  not  to  establish  a  common 
right,  but  to  make  the  difference  between  the  election  and  the 
reprobation  ;  the  election  baptizing  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
reprobation  suffering  to  remain  under  the  penalty,  not  indeed 
of  a  broken  law  which  He  hath  removed  from  all  alike,  but 
under  the  penalty  of  a  rejected  gospel.  That,  therefore,  upon 
which  election  standeth,  is  the  office  which  Christ  fulfilleth 


1 88       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD : 

since  His  resurrection;  that  upon  which  reconciliation  standeth, 
the  common  gifts  which  He  hath  purchased  by  His  death, 
and  the  title  which  He  hath  thereby  made  up  for  Himself, 
unto  the  possession  and  lordship  of  all  the  creatures.  As 
Reconciler,  He  took  off  the  curse  of  the  Law,  which,  though 
not  openly  imposed  from  the  beginning,  had  been  laid  on  in 
all  its  iron  terrors  by  the  covenant  of  Sinai,  which  I  take  to 
be  the  true  covenant  of  works,  according  to  that  saying  of  the 
apostle  Paul,  "  The  law  speaketh  on  this  wise,  He  that 
doeth  these  things  shall  live  in  them."  This  law  having  kept, 
He  had  no  right  to  die,  but  His  right  was  to  live  in  them. 
He  became,  so  to  speak,  the  proprietor  of  the  law,  the  only 
competent  judge,  as  being  the  only  innocent  man.  He  hath, 
as  it  were,  taken  up  the  forfeited  estate  of  life,  by  paying  a 
condition  of  perfect  holiness ;  and,  therefore.  His  submitting 
unto  death  is  a  second  and  a  higher  mystery  thanJHis  remov- 
ing the  curse  of  the  law.  By  the  free-will  submission  of 
Himself  to  death,  which  He  was  capable  of,  as  being  in  the 
fallen  state,  though  not  obliged  to  it,  as  being  perfectly  holy, 
He  did,  as  it  were,  do  for  the  dead  what  He  had  already  done 
for  the  living.  By  keeping  the  law.  He  absolved  all  that  came 
after  Him  from  that  law ;  but  by  death,  He  did  this,  moreover, 
that  He  delivered  all  that  went  before  Him  from  him  that 
had  the  power  of  death.  This  retrospective  action  of  His 
death  is  distinctly  referred  to  in  these  two  passages  of  holy 
writ: — Rom.  iii.  25,  "Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  pro- 
pitiation through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteous- 
ness for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past  through  the  for- 
bearance of  God;"  and  Heb.  ix.  15,  "And  for  this  cause 
he  is  the  Mediator  of  the  New  Testament,  that  by  means  of 
death,  for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  that  were 
under  the  first  testament,  they  having  been  called  might  re- 
ceive the  promise  of  the  eternal  inheritance."  After  taking 
away  the  bondage  of  the  law  from  the  living,  He  died  to 
take  away  the  bondage  of  death  from  the  dead.  And  thus 
hath  He  established  unto  Himself  the  right  to  be  both  the 
judge  of  the  living  by  the  administration  of  His  law,  and  the 
judge  of  the  dead  by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  And  thus 
is  He  established  Lord,  thus  hath  He  purchased  to  Himself 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  189 

the  title  of  Lord  of  quick  and  dead,  by  that  which  He  hath 
done  for  human  kind.  We  preach  no  law  in  Christ ;  we 
preach  no  imputation  of  sin  in  Christ ;  we  preach  no  condem- 
nation in  Christ ;  we  preach  resurrection  from  the  dead  in 
Christ ;  we  preach  life  and  immortality  in  Christ.  These,  as 
hath  been  said,  are  Christ's  own  purchase,  which  Christ  hath 
freely  bequeathed  and  appointed  unto  us,  to  minister  unto 
all.  By  all  this,  is  the  world  the  better  for  Christ.  These  are 
His  benefits.  This  is  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  And 
yet  after  all  this  has  been  enumerated,  I  may  say  the  nobile 
officiuni,  the  noble  office  of  Christ  hath  not  been  entered  on. 

John,  His  forerunner  and  herald,  did  characterise  His  office 
thus :  "  He  shall  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire." 
He  did,  indeed,  likewise  describe  His  common  and  universal 
function,  when  he  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  ;"  but  he  lifted  Him  into  a 
higher  sphere,  when  he  said,  "  I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water,  but  One  mightier  than  I  cometh,  whose  shoes  I  am  not 
worthy  to  unloose :  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  with  fire  ;  whose  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will 
thoroughly  purge  his  floor,  and  will  gather  the  wheat  into 
his  garner,  but  the  chaff  he  will  burn  with  fire  unquenchable." 
In  this  work  of  separation  and  distinction,  in  this  work  of  sal- 
vation and  of  judgment,  in  this  baptism  of  some  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  of  the  rest  with  fire,  standeth  the  true  divinity  of 
the  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  Unto  this  He  passed  when  He 
passed  into  the  heavens  ;  and  this  hath  He  been  executing 
ever  since.  And  it  is  in  this  making  of  a  difference  between 
the  election  and  reprobation  of  God,  that  salvation  truly 
consisteth.  Christ  having  by  the  work  which  He  did  in  the 
flesh,  established  unto  Himself  the  Lordship  of  all  creation, 
and  the  right  and  title  to  bring  it  up  again  from  death,  by 
the  resurrection  ;  so  much  of  the  Father's  purpose  was  ac- 
complished for  the  honour  and  glory  of  His  Son.  But  it  still 
remained  to  unfold  the  end  for  which  this  great  purchase  of 
creation  hath  been  made.  And,  now,  the  second  part  of  the 
Father's  idea  began  to  be  realised  in  the  regeneration,  or 
second  birth  of  His  creatures.  Heretofore  the  creation  stood 
without  the  inhabitation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  created,  doubt- 


1 90       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

less,  by  the  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  not  by  Him  in- 
habited. The  first  creature  to  whom  He  joined  Himself  was 
the  human  nature  of  Christ,  His  dealings  with  and  by  the 
prophets,  were  only,  as  it  were,  predictive  of  this  inhabitation. 
It  is  not  at  all  to  underrate  the  inspiration  of  the  holy  pro- 
phets, in  whom  the  Spirit  of  Christ  was,  when  I  say  that  they 
were  not  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  they  were 
under  His  power  after  another  and  a  lower  kind  than  that  in 
which  He  was  given  at  Pentecost ;  but  it  is  to  honour  this 
great  prerogative  of  Christ,  the  risen  God-man,  which  is  to 
baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  justify  that  text  of  John, 
"  For  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  because  that  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified,"  (John  vii.  39 ;)  and  that  other  text  of 
the  Acts,  where  the  brethren  and  disciples  of  John's  baptizing, 
whom  Paul  met  with  at  Ephesus,  said  unto  him,  "  We  have 
not  so  much  as  heard  whether  there  be  any  Holy  Ghost." 
As  Christ  was  present  in  the  persons,  in  the  types,  and  in  the 
symbols  of  every  dispensation  of  God,  though  His  incarna- 
tion was  not  until  He  was  conceived  by  the  Virgin  ;  so  judge 
I,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  present  in  the  persons  of  all  in- 
spired prophets,  and  of  all  the  Old  Testament  saints,  though 
He  was  not  yet  given,  because  Christ  was  not  yet  glorified. 
In  Christ  first,  then  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  His 
ascension  into  glory,  "  in  that  mighty  power  which  he  wrought 
in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  set  him  at 
his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above  all  prin- 
cipalities and  power,  and  might  and  dominion,  and  every 
name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this  world,  but  in  that  which 
is  to  come  ;" — in  this  great  act  of  Almighty  power,  taking 
from  death's  hold,  and  corruption's  mouth,  heaven's  highest, 
brightest,  noblest  Prince,  did  the  Father  put  forth  the  begin- 
ning of  the  second  creation,  or  regeneration,  which  constitutes 
Christ  first-begotten  from  the  dead,  and  therefore  the  High 
Priest  and  Head  of  the  regeneration,  destroying  for  ever  that 
great  source  of  error  which  ariseth  out  of  the  time  of  His  in- 
carnation ;  as  if,  by  being  late  in  His  manifestation.  He  was 
not  first  in  the  purpose,  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of 
God.  Now,  indeed,  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ's  body,  the 
glory  of  the  Divine  idea  and  purpose  in  creation  began  to 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  191 

manifest  itself,  and  Christ  the  first-born  from  the  dead,  (now 
the  first-begotten  amongst  many  to  be  begotten,  as  in  His 
eternal  generation  He  is  the  only-begotten,)  was  in  the  very 
fact  of  His  resurrection  constituted  head  of  the  regenerated 
creatures,  head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,  as  by  His  life 
and  death  of  holiness  He  had  been  constituted  the  Lamb  of 
God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  From  this  time 
forth,  He  becomcth  the  Father's  hand.  His  right  hand,  the  Man 
of  His  right  hand,  to  regenerate  by  the  communication  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  whatsoever  of  the  creatures  purchased  by  His 
death  it  might  please  the  Father  to  regenerate.  Regeneration, 
therefore,  or  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  Christ, 
by  gift  of  the  Father,  doth  bestow  upon  the  creatures  who,  by 
His  redemption,  have  their  way  open  to  the  Father,  and  the 
Father's  way  open  unto  them,  is  as  determinately  and  essen- 
tially a  specific,  personal,  elective  work  as  redemption  by  the 
life  and  death  of  Christ  is  a  common  work.  And  as  the  com- 
monness of  the  latter  will  clearly  appear,  when  all  the  dead 
shall  rise  in  Christ,  and  by  Christ  be  judged,  and  by  Christ  be 
constituted  and  sustained  in  their  several  estates  of  heaven 
and  hell,  fixed,  eternal,  and  unchangeable ;  so  shall  the  spe- 
cialty of  the  work  of  regeneration,  and  its  application  only  to 
a  part,  have  been  made  to  appear  before  this  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  regenerate  unto  life,  and  not  unto  judgment,  and 
in  their  kingdom  during  the  millennial  age.  As  Christ  was 
declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  by  His  resurrection 
from  the  dead,  (Roni.  i.  4,)  so  shall  these  be  manifested  to  be 
the  sons  of  God  by  their  resurrection.  And  this  is  the  day  of 
the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God,  for  which  all  creation 
groaneth,  and  travaileth  in  bondage  until  now. 

Seeing,  then,  that  the  regeneration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
nothing  more  than  the  fulfilling,  or  accomplishing,  or  bringing 
into  being  of  the  Father's  purpose  of  election,  and  seeing  that 
Christ,  and  He  alone,  hath  the  office  of  baptizing  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  it  doth  necessarily  follow  that  Christ's  ofiice  in 
the  heavens,  since  the  resurrection,  hath  been  no  other  than 
to  accomplish  the  decree  of  election,  as  His  work,  from 
His  incarnation  unto  His  resurrection,  was  to  accomplish 
the  work  of  redemption  unto  the  fallen  world.     His  head- 


192       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

ship  of  the  Church,  or  the  election,  is  therefore  another 
and  a  higher  mystery  than  His  lordship  over  all ;  where- 
fore it  is  written  in  the  passage  of  Ephesians  quoted  above, 
"  And  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  given  him  to  be 
the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,  which  is  his  body,  the 
fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  That  subjection  of  all 
things  to  Him  doth  only,  as  it  were,  fit  Him  for  being  head  of 
the  Church,  which  is  the  regenerated  portion  that  is  to  be 
brought  out  of  all  things.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  our 
fathers,  while  they  were  first  and  foremost  to  enhance  the  dig- 
nity of  an  earthly  king  or  magistrate  as  the  viceroy  of  Christ, 
the  Lord  of  all,  would  never  suffer  the  king  to  be  called  Head 
of  the  Church  ;  because  they  knew  that  this  mystery,  which  I 
am  now  explaining,  of  the  difference  between  Lord  of  all 
and  Head  of  the  Church,  would  have  been  thereby  marred 
and  misrepresented.  As  Lord  of  all.  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords,  they  claimed  for  Him  supremacy  over  all 
principality  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every 
name  that  is  named  in  this  world  ;  and  they  required  men 
of  every  name  to  observe  and  obey,  and  do  homage  unto 
their  common  liege  lord  ;  and  kings  and  magistrates  they 
required  to  rule  in  His  name,  and  for  His  behoof,  because 
all  should  yet  stand  at  His  judgment-seat,  and  acknowledge 
through  eternity  His  rightful.  His  only  sovereignty  over  them. 
This  dignity  we  preachers  crave  for  Christ,  in  virtue  of  His 
death,  which  purchased  the  world  back  from  the  power  of  sin 
and  of  the  grave.  But  in  virtue  of  a  higher  claim,  even  of  His 
ascension  and  honour  and  glory,  in  virtue  of  that  accumula- 
tion of  power  almighty  into  His  right  hand,  in  virtue  of  His 
being  made  by  the  Father  possessor  and  distributor  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  it  cometh  to  pass  that  He  is  Head  of  the  Church  ; 
of  which  power  no  shadow,  emblem,  nor  symbol  having  been 
given  to  the  civil  magistrate,  he  can  in  no  way  or  manner 
claim  to  rule  under  this,  Christ's  supreme  title,  and  therefore 
may  not  bear  its  name.  Into  whose  hands,  then,  is  the  shadow, 
type,  emblem,  or  symbol  of  Christ's  official  acting  as  Head  of 
the  Church  committed?  His  official  acting  as  Head  of  the 
Church  is,  as  hath  been  said,  to  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
and  of  this,  baptism  with  water  is  the  shadow,  type,  and 


BY  PAR TICULAR  ELECTION.  193 

symbol.  We  baptize  believers  with  water,  only  because  Christ 
baptizeth  believers  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  baptism  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  that  mystery  in  the  invisible  which  baptism 
in  the  visible  symboliseth ;  and  therefore  so  much  to  be 
abhorred  is  the  opinion  of  those  who  would  baptize  indis- 
criminately, and  so  much  to  be  approved  is  the  discipline  of 
the  Church,  which  permitteth  the  children  of  believing  parents 
only  to  be  baptized.  For  baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
essentially  a  discriminate,  and  not  an  indiscriminate,  work 
done  unto  and -upon  the  election  of  the  Father,  unto  and  upon 
them  alone.  Now  the  election  of  the  Father  are  previously 
led  unto  the  Father  by  Christ,  who  is  the  only  way  to  the 
Father,  and  came  out  from  the  Father,  to  bring  us  unto  the 
Father ;  and  being  led  unto  the  Father  by  Christ,  the  Father 
doth  honour  the  disciple  of  His  Son,  by  granting  unto  him, 
through  that  same  Son,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Faith, 
therefore,  upon  the  incarnate  crucified  Christ,  standeth  in  the 
great  idea,  before  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  risen 
Christ :  and  therefore  in  the  symbol,  faith  solemnly  avouched 
in  Christ,  and  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  which  dwelt  in  Him 
bodily,  must  necessarily  be  put  before  baptism  with  w^ater,  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  it 
is  wholly  to  mar  and  misrepresent  the  mystery,  and  to  make 
the  symbol  declare  a  continual  falsehood,  to  baptize  without 
precognition  of  the  faith  of  the  baptized  person  taken  in  him- 
self, or  in  that  person  with  whom  he  is  considered  as  one.  The 
inconscious  irresponsible  babe,  being  by  God  regarded  as  of 
substance  one  with  its  parent,  until  the  growth  of  will  and  of 
reason  give  it  personality  distinct  (which  is  more  than  I  can 
say  of  a  sponsor),  it  thence  cometh  to  be  necessary,  that  the 
faith  of  the  parent  be  solemnly  declared,  before  the  sacrament 
is  administered  to  his  child.  Now  the  Church,  being  oft  all 
hands  the  guardian  of  discipline,  it  follows  that  the  Church 
is  her  own  head  upon  earth ;  or  rather,  to  speak  more  cor- 
rectly, the  Church  hath  no  head  upon  earth,  but  is  a  body 
without  a  head  ;  and  you  might  as  well  give  unto  the  king  or 
civil  magistrate  the  keeping  and  administering  of  the  sacra- 
ments as  give  unto  him  the  title  of  Head  of  the  Church.  It 
is  a  misnomer,  to  say  the  best  of  it,  in  our  sister  Church ;  or, 
VOL.  V.  N 


1 94       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

if  it  be  not  a  misnomer,  then  it  is  something  infinitely  worse. 
But  to  return. 

Seeing,  then,  that  Christ's  baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
really  and  truly,  and  to  the  fullest  extent,  the  effecting  of  the 
Father's  purpose  of  election,  the  bringing  of  His  elect  ones 
out  of  the  unregenerate  world,  the  implanting  in  them  of  a 
Divine  person,  who  abideth  for  ever  there  where  He  hath  once 
come,  and  shall  not,  cannot,  be  dislodged  again  for  ever,  it  is 
most  manifest  that  to  believe  in  the  Father's  election,  and  to 
believe  in  Christ's  active  Headship  of  the  Church,  and  to  be- 
lieve in  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  truly  to  believe  in  one 
and  the  same  thing.  The  election  of  the  Father,  the  office  of 
Christ  to  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  actual  sancti- 
fication  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  the  three  functions  of  the 
persons  in  the  Godhead  towards  the  accomplishing  of  the  one 
work  of  our  regeneration.  Election,  therefore,  Christ's  head- 
ship of  the  Church,  and  regeneration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  must 
stand  or  fall  together.  Where  election  is  not  believed  in, 
there  Christ's  high  resurrection  office  to  baptize  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  will  be  forgotten;  and  men  will  get  no  higher 
than  His  cross,  burial,  and  forthcoming  from  the  tomb,  never 
attaining  unto  the  discourse  of  His  post-resurrection  work, 
but  losing  Him  in  the  white  cloud,  and  fancying  Him  a  dis- 
solved wide-spread  substance,  instead  of  a  personal  presence, 
and  an  almighty  power.  They  will  dwell  by  the  Jordan  in 
their  discourse,  and  in  the  towns  of  Galilee,  and  in  the  temple 
of  Jerusalem,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  on  Calvary,  and  so 
forth,  deciphering  the  justice,  the  charity,  the  nobility  of  all 
His  works,  but  no  higher  ascending ;  preaching  the  imitation 
of  His  obedience,  and  using  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help  us  to  keep 
the  law,  which  is  to  bring  us  back  unto  the  law,  from  which 
Christ  hath  for  ever  delivered  us.  Where  election  is  not  be- 
lieved, the  humanity  of  Christ  alone  will  be  apprehended  ;  not 
the  mystery  of  His  humanity,  but  the  example  of  His  hu- 
manity. Yea,  they  may  attain  unto  the  bodily  measure  of 
the  Godhead,  that  was  within  such  narrow  conditions  and 
under  such  dark  veils  concealed  ;  but  into  that  dignity,  and 
majesty,  and  might  Divine,  which  He  hath  since  acquired, 
and  doth  now  occupy  in  the  heavens,  bringing  to  pass  every 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  195 

secret  purpose  of  the  invisible  Father,  making  the  Godhead's 
full  purpose  to  be  accomplished,  and  the  hidden  things  to  be 
made  known; — into  the  mystery  of  the  invisible  Godhead, 
which  He  invisibly  exerciseth  in  all  chambers  of  creation, 
gathering  out  from  thence  the  Father's  hidden  ones,  and  pre- 
serving them  separate  in  the  midst  of  all  powers  and  preven- 
tions of  darkness,  and  of  sin  ; — into  these  noble  offices  of 
Christ,  which  pertain  to  Him  as  the  Baptizer  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  they  cannot  enter  who  believe  not  in  the  election  of 
the  Father.  For  if  they  believe  not  that  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  an  election  of  the  Father,  which  Christ  by  baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  separating,  and  by  Headship  of  the 
Church  is  governing,  how  can  they  believe  or  understand 
the  doing  or  fulfilling  of  the  same  ?  They  shear  Him  of  the 
beams  of  His  glory;  they  take  away  from  Him  the  locks  of 
His  strength  ;  they  understand  not  His  present  Nazarite  func- 
tion, who  said  before  His  death,  "  I  sanctify  myself,  (or  I  make 
a  Nazarite  of  myself,)  for  their  sakes,  that  they  also  might  be 
sanctified  by  the  truth  ;"  who  said  also,  "  Henceforth,  I  will 
not  drink  of  the  juice  of  the  vine,  until  I  drink  it  new  with 
you  in  my  Father's  kingdom."  I  say,  the  seven  locks  in 
which  lie  the  mighty  Nazarite's  power,  which  are  the  seven 
Spirits  of  God,  they  shear  Him  of,  and  bring  Him  down  to 
the  dimensions  of  a  common  man,  keeping  Him  under  the 
law,  bringing  His  Church  under  the  law,  and  innumerable 
other  grievances  inflicting. 

Moreover,  from  the  same  unity  of  action  which  there  is  in 
the  election  of  the  Father,  the  baptizing  by  Christ  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  the  actual  work  of  the  Spirit,  it  follows  that 
one  who  denies  the  election  of  the  Father,  not  only  loseth  all 
knowledge  and  apprehension  of  Christ's  supercelestial  glory 
and  office,  and  advent  and  kingdom,  yea,  and  present  govern- 
ment over  magistrates  and  kings,  and  the  creatures  also,  but 
they  likewise  lose  all  distinct  apprehension  of  the  Spirit's 
work,  which,  being  dissevered  from  the  Father's  election,  and 
from  Christ's  headship  of  the  Church,  doth  fall  away  into  the 
mere  heathen  notion  of  the  Divine  blessing,  or,  at  best,  some 
gracious  communication  of  an  undefined  and  undefinable 
power,  blowing,  like  the  wind,  whither  it  listeth.    But  to  enter 


1 96       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

into  the  Spirit's  personality,  to  believe  in  Him,  not  as  the  in- 
comprehensible infinite,  but  as  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  same 
mind  which  was  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  child  of  Christ,  in  form 
and  feature,  not  of  the  Christ  in  flesh,  made  of  a  woman,  made 
under  the  law,  but  of  the  Christ  in  glory,  and  triumphant  over 
all  His  enemies ;  to  know  the  Spirit  as  the  expression  of  the 
Father's  electing  love,  and  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the 
soul,  and  the  indwelling  of  Father  and  of  Son,  and  the  in- 
structive witness  unto  the  offices  of  both,  and  the  continual 
worker  in  us  of  the  good  works  foreordained  by  the  Father ; 
to  feel  Him  as  the  comforter  in  Christ's  absence,  and  the 
continual  prompter  unto  the  desire  of  Christ's  presence,  as  the 
absolute  irresistible  regenerator  of  the  rebellious  and  dead 
creature,  who,  once  given,  cannot  be  withdrawn  for  ever  ; 
which,  once  possessed,  cannot  for  ever  be  lost  ;  parent  of  per- 
severance, parent  of  assurance,  parent  of  a  peace  and  joy  with 
which  the  world  intermeddleth  not ; — these  and  many  others, 
the  personal  offices  of  the  Spirit,  must  needs  depart  from  the 
knowledge  of  those  who  will  not  know  the  election  of  the 
Father,  and  from  the  experience  of  those  who  will  deny  the 
election  of  the  Father.  For  the  Spirit  is  a  regenerator  only 
unto  the  election  of  the  Father,  which,  being  disbelieved  or 
disesteemed,  will  come  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  kind  of  com- 
mon blessing,  proceeding  somehow  from  Christ  upon  the 
world  in  general,  and  to  which  all  alike  are  privileged ;  or  if 
the  glaring  falsehood  of  this  notion  stare  them  in  the  face, 
they  will  then  correct  it,  perhaps,  by  the  Arminian  hypothesis 
of  ordinary  and  extraordinary  influences  of  the  Spirit ;  or  they 
will  adopt  that  most  abominable  notion  of  the  Wesleyan  Me- 
thodists, that  we  may  possess  the  Spirit  one  day,  and  lose 
Him  the  next,  and  be  as  free  as  ever  to  receive  Him  the  next, 
and  so  on,  through  a  life  of  fluctuation,  unto  a  death  of  like 
fluctuation,  and  haply  an  eternity  of  the  same.  Oh,  my 
soul  is  grieved  at  the  state  in  which  the  doctrine  of  the 
Spirit  is  found  amongst  us  !  Words,  unsanctified  words, 
impersonal  words,  which  I  could  apply  to  the  sun,  and 
moon,  and  stars,  as  fitly  as  to  a  person ;  this,  verily,  is 
the  language  applied  unto  the  Spirit.  But  of  His  office  to 
seal  the  Father's  election,  to  reveal  the  Father's  love  unto 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  197 

His  own,  to  kill  the  old  man,  and  with  him  the  law  which 
had  to  do  with  him ;  to  reveal  in  us  the  power  of  Christ's 
resurrection,  to  beget  in  us  sons  unto  glory ;  to  inform  us 
with  the  fellowship  of  His  victories  and  triumphs  ;  to  be  in 
us  a  new  substance,  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  fallen 
Adam  ;  to  be  in  us  a  new  life,  which  is  super-legal,  and  hath 
nothing  to  do  with  legalities  whatever,  nor  with  prohibitions, 
nor  with  fears,  nor  with  servilities,  but  keepeth  all  these 
things  down  under  His  feet,  in  a  state  of  death,  or,  next  to 
death,  impotent  grovelling  desperation  ;  these  high  offices  of 
the  Spirit,  His  true  and  only  function,  they  skill  not  to  dis- 
course of,  desire  not  to  hear  discoursed  of,  cannot  hear,  but 
abhor  ;  even  all  those  who  abhor  the  doctrine  of  election ; 
because  the  Spirit's  work  is  nothing  but  the  accomplishing  of 
the  election,  of  which,  if  a  man  refuse  the  absoluteness  unto 
the  Father,  he  must  refuse  the  authority  and  government 
unto  the  Son,  and  the  effecting  and  accomplishment  unto 
the  Spirit. 

Moreover,  they  who  deny  the  election  can  understand 
nothing  of  the  mystery  of  the  Church,  which  is  the  great 
symbol  of  the  election.  The  election  of  the  Father  are,  truly 
speaking,  the  only  Church ; — the  Church  of  the  first-born 
whose  names  are  written  in  heaven,  the  members  of  the  body 
of  Christ,  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But,  forasmuch  as 
this  holy  community  of  the  regenerate  is  hidden  from  human 
sight,  and  known  only  to  the  Father,  neither  shall  be  mani- 
fested until  the  day  of  the  Lord's  advent,  it  is  necessary  to 
constitute  a  symbol  thereof,  which  may  take  the  sight  of  men, 
and  occupy  their  understanding  and  their  feelings,  in  such 
wise  as  to  help  them  to  the  knowledge  of  that  which  is  in- 
visible. Such  a  symbol  is  the  visible  Church,  which  doth  re- 
present the  election  in  all  its  parts.  Every  member  thereof 
must  be  baptized  with  water,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  signify  and  seal  his  en- 
grafting into  Christ,  his  being  made  a  partaker  of  all  the 
blessings  of  the  new  covenant,  and  his  dedication  to  be  the 
Lord's.  This  symboliseth  the  regeneration  by  the  baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  which  Christ  baptizeth  every  one 
of  the  Father's  election.     And  hence  the  reason  that  there  is 


1 98       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD : 

no  second  baptism,  in  passing  from  one  communion  of  the 
Christian  Church  to  another ;  because  the  Holy  Ghost,  being 
once  received,  cannot  be  lost  again.  To  be  baptized  the 
second  time  is  to  mar  and  misrepresent  the  great  mystery  for 
which  this  ordinance  is  placed  in  the  Church.  If  then,  bap- 
tism symboliseth  the  regeneration  of  the  Spirit,  a  baptized 
person  is  the  visible  symbol  of  a  regenerated  person,  and  the 
community  of  the  baptized,  or  the  visible  Church,  is  the 
symbol  of  the  regenerated  ones  of  the  Spirit,  or  the  elected 
ones  of  the  Father.  Now  this  symbol  being  intended  to 
carry  the  import  of  the  thing  symbolised,  being  unto  faith 
indeed  that  very  thing,  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  ever  speaketh 
unto  faith,  doth  name  the  symbol  always  by  the  attributes 
of  the  thing  symbolised,  and  not  by  the  attributes  of  the 
symbol  itself.  He  doth  not  say.  This  washing  represents  the 
washing  away  of  thy  sins ;  but,  Be  baptized,  and  wash  away 
thy  sins.  He  doth  not  say.  Baptism  representeth  our  sal- 
vation by  the  Spirit ;  but,  Baptism  saveth  us.  He  doth 
not  say,  This  bread  represents  the  body  of  Christ;  but, 
This  is  my  body ;  and  again.  This  is  my  blood.  And 
speaking  of  the  baptized,  or  the  visible  Church,  the  Holy 
Spirit  calleth  them  "  saints,"  "  elect  of  the  Father,"  "  sprinkled 
with  the  blood  of  Christ,"  "  washed  with  the  regeneration  of 
the  Holy  Ghost."  He  calleth  them  "  the  holy  nation,  the 
royal  priesthood,  the  chosen  generation,  the  peculiar  people  " 
of  the  Lord.  Yet  are  they  not  so  in  very  deed,  but  a 
company  of  elect  and  reprobate  mingled  together ;  and 
yet  though  this  we  know,  we  may  not  speak  of  the  Church  in 
any  other  language  than  the  language  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
because  we  speak  to  the  hearing  of  faith,  and  not  to  the  hear- 
ing of  sense  ;  and  our  language  will  not  deceive  the  hearing 
of  faith,  but  only  the  hearing  of  sense,  which  it  is  as  much  our 
business  to  deceive,  as  it  is  our  business  to  instruct  the  other ; 
our  language  being  unto  sense  or  worldly  wisdom  foolish- 
ness ;  our  language  being  unto  faith  the  power  of  God,  and 
the  wisdom  of  God.  We  who  use  it  may  use  it  hypocritically, 
convinced  that  for  our  parts  we  have  no  right,  so  to  speak, 
being  unworthy  ministers,  and  unfaithful  stewards.  You  also 
may  feel  that  you  have  no  right  to  be  so  spoken  to,  being  un- 


BY  PARTICULAR  ELECTION.  199 

worthy  and  fruitless  members  of  Christ,  but  not  the  less  ought 
the  holy  language  of  faith,  and  that  only,  to  circulate  in  the 
Church,  from  ministers  to  people,  and  from  people  to  one 
another  ;  feeding  those  who  have  faith,  and  making  hypocrites 
of  those  who  have  it  not.  And  I  may  here  observe,  that  to 
the  keeping  up  of  this  language  in  all  the  papal  instruments, 
it  is  due  perhaps  more  than  to  anything  else,  that  in  the 
absence  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  in  the  presence  of  such 
awful  superstition,  there  should  yet  be  found  in  that  spiritual 
Sodom  faithful  ones  of  God.  And  to  this  same  holy  language, 
presented  in  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  it  is  due, 
that  under  the  legal  and  Arminian  preaching  of  the  last 
century,  the  true  faith  was  not  wholly  rooted  out  of  that  com- 
munion. And  I  will  say  further,  that  if  baptized  men,  if 
churchmen  would  speak  to  one  another  the  language  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  effect  would  be,  to  separate  by  a  distinct 
line  between  worldly  wisdom  and  the  wisdom  from  above, 
between  Divine  ideas  and  human  ideas  of  all  things.  And 
the  elect  of  God  would  be  nourished  by  every  opening  of  the 
mouth,  and  the  reprobate  would  as  often  be  warned,  rebuked, 
and  condemned.  But,  which  is  far  more  important,  the 
Church  would  do  its  office  of  representing  the  election  of  God> 
assuming  unto  itself  all  the  attributes,  and  speaking  all  the 
language  thereof;  the  everlasting  ordinance  would  not  be 
changed ;  the  mind  of  God  would  not  be  represented  merely 
in  a  written  book,  but  organised  and  expressed  by  living  men. 
By  reason  of  forgetting  and  undervaluing  the  great  principle 
of  the  election,  and  making  the  universal  reconciliation  to  be 
all  in  all,  men  have  come  into,  and  must  remain  under,  ignor- 
ance and  perplexity  with  respect  to  the  symbol  thereof,  which 
is  the  Church.  And  everything  connected  therewith  will 
come  to  lose  its  substance,  and  by  degrees  to  change  its  very 
form : — Baptism  first  of  all  to  be  but  a  sign  of  something 
which  every  one  will  seek  to  define  as  the  least  and  the  lowest 
thing  possible  ;  a  memorial  haply  of  our  sinfulness,  instead  of 
being,  what  it  truly  is,  the  abolition  of  all  memorials  thereof 
And  the  Lord's  Supper  will  come  to  be  a  mere  memorial  of 
Christ's  death  ;  ordination  of  office-bearers  a  mere  sanction  of 
the  voice  of  the  people,  or  title  to  the  dignities  and  immunities 


200       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD  : 

of  the  office  ;  discipline,  a  mere  religious  and  spiritual  police  ; 
holy  living,  a  mere  keeping  of  the  law;  and  preaching,  an  ex- 
position of  the  law,  with  motives  and  means  to  the  perform- 
ance of  the  same ;  all  which  views  of  the  Church  I  solemnly 
denounce,  as  most  false,  most  pernicious,  most  destructive  of 
souls.  But  from  what  time  you  come  to  see  the  Church  in 
its  true  light,  as  the  great  symbol  of  the  election,  and  to  use 
it  as  the  key  to  open  that  great  mystery,  then  at  once,  and  I 
may  say  instantaneously,  do  the  symbol  and  the  thing  sym- 
bolised explain  one  another ;  as  the  key  is  the  best  inter- 
pretation to  the  lock,  and  the  lock  the  best  interpretation 
to  the  key,  so  is  a  symbol  the  best  interpretation  to  the 
mystery,  and  the  mystery  the  best  interpretation  to  the  sym- 
bol. As  we  have  said,  baptism,  the  admission  to  the  Church, 
symboliseth  Christ  baptizing  Avith  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is 
admission  amongst  the  election  of  the  Father,  or  the  regene- 
rated ones  of  the  Spirit.  And  from  that  time  forth  we  are 
beholden  unto  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  for  power  given, 
and  obligation  come  under,  to  shew  forth,  in  our  thought, 
speech,  and  behaviour,  the  life  of  a  regenerate  man.  To  feed 
and  nourish  this  goodly  company,  we  have  put  into  our  hands 
the  symbols  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  that  is  to  say, 
these  regenerated  ones,  these  elected  ones  have  no  support, 
sustenance,  nor  fellowship  of  substance  with  this  visible  world, 
but  are  of  one  substance  with  the  body  of  Christ,  upon  which 
they  live  by  faith,  receiving  from  it  the  vigour  and  the  sub- 
stance of  a  new  life,  as  the  body  receiveth  the  vigour  and 
energy  of  life  from  bread.  The  Church,  observe  you,  is  not 
merely  the  living  ones  in  this  world,  but  the  living  ones  in 
the  Jerusalem  above,  and  likewise  the  elect  ones  of  the 
Father,  who  are  yet  to  live ; — of  all  which  company,  those 
above  and  those  beneath,  there  is  but  one  nourishment  and 
one  substance,  which  is  the  holy  humanity  of  Christ ;  and 
this  humanity,  in  its  earthly  form  of  redeemed  flesh  and 
blood,  which  is  the  support,  the  basis,  the  nourishment,  the 
substance  of  the  Church,  as  Adam  is  of  the  world, — Christ, 
the  Father  of  the  regeneration,  Adam  the  father  of  the  gene- 
ration. Moreover,  this  company  of  elect  ones,  which  the 
Church  s}'mboliseth,  must  be  under  government,  and  pre- 


BY  PAR TICULAR  ELECTION.  201 

served  as  one  community,  having  in  it  no  schisms  nor  divi- 
sions ;  for  the  body  is  one,  as  the  Head  is  one,  though  the 
members  of  the  body  be  many. 

To  the  end,  therefore,  of  preserving  this  unity,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  there  should  be  governments  in  the  Church,  who 
may  be  for  the  healing  of  divisions,  and  for  the  remedying 
of  evils.  This  is  the  ground  of  all  discipline  and  government 
in  the  Church,  to  endeavour  to  preserve  that  unity  of  faith 
and  spirit  which  is  so  essential  to  the  election  of  God ;  and  it 
would  have  been  impossible  to  justify  the  Reformation  in 
constituting  a  separate  Church,  had  it  not  been  expressly 
written,  that  the  Gentile  Church  was  to  become  apostate, 
and  God's  people  were  to  come  out  of  her.  If  Rome  be 
not  Babylon,  then  Protestantism  is  a  schism,  or  a  sect.  If 
Rome  be  a  true  church,  then  are  the  Protestant  commu- 
nions schismatical  and  sectarian ;  for  there  cannot  be  two 
churches,  either  we  excommunicate  Rome,  or  Rome  hath 
a  right  to  excommunicate  us.  To  make  the  election  con- 
sist of  two  separate  parts,  in  opposition  to  each  other, 
were  totally  to  mar  and  misrepresent  the  truth.  This 
remark  beareth  hard  upon  the  divisions  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Protestant  Church,  and  shews  how  necessary  it  is  for 
a  good  Christian  to  maintain  brotherly  love  to  those  of 
every  church  who  hold  the  true  faith  of  Christ,  and  have  not 
fallen  into  any  heresies.  Out  of  this  same  idea  of  the  Church, 
as  representing  the  election,  cometh  the  true  meaning  of  ex- 
communication. Excommunication  is  the  separating  from 
the  communion  of  the  brethren  of  some  one  who  is  depraved 
in  his  mind  by  heresy,  or  in  his  conscience  by  the  wickedness 
that  is  in  him ;  to  the  end  that,  when  he  is  thus  set  apart,  he 
may  feel  the  more  acutely,  and  perceive  the  more  distinctly, 
what  an  awful  thing  it  will  be,  if,  in  the  end,  he  should  be 
cast  out  from  amongst  the  chosen  ones  of  God.  Excommuni- 
cation is  not  reprobation ;  but  it  is  the  act  of  the  Church 
declaring  a  man  to  be  in  rebellion  against  the  Spirit,  and 
against  the  Church,  the  dispenser,  under  Christ,  of  the  Spirit's 
gifts.  For  if  it  were  the  symbol  of  reprobation,  then  there 
would  be  no  occasion  presented  of  repentance  unto  such  an 
one.     All  these,  and  many  other  ordinances  of  the  Church, 


202       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

become  plain  to  the  simplest  capacity  of  those  who  believe  in 
the  election  of  the  Father,  and  see  the  Church  as  the  symbol 
thereof;  but  unto  one  ■who  stumbleth  at  that  stone,  the 
Church,  with  all  its  beautiful  ordinances,  with  all  its  perfect 
organisation,  is  either  a  system  of  foolishness  or  a  system  of 
hypocrisy. 

Thus  have  I  shewn  at  length  how  any  faltering  upon  the 
great  doctrine  of  election,  bringeth  with  it  necessary  con- 
fusion into  all  other  departments  of  Christian  doctrine  and 
Christian  life ;  which  may  all  be  summed  up  in  this  one 
word :  He  that  doubteth  of  the  election,  believing  the  re- 
demption only,  must  remain  ignorant  of  Christ's  active 
ministry,  in  baptizing  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost's  active  ser\ace  in  delivering  the  soul  from  the  law  of 
the  flesh,  and  from  the  curse  of  the  moral  law. 

TART  III. 

Having  thus  explained  how,  out  of  the  union  of  the  God- 
head and  fallen  manhood,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  there 
cometh  perfect  and  complete  reconciliation  and  atonement 
between  God  and  the  fallen  creatures,  I  have  now  to  shew 
how  this  is  accompanied  with  the  removal  of  the  law;  not 
any  particular  law,  or  part  of  the  law,  but  law  in  general,  as 
proceeding  from  the  mouth  of  God  unto  His  fallen  creatures. 
The  grace  of  God,  the  goodness  of  God  is,  I  may  say,  hin- 
dered from  being  known  and  communicated  where  the  law  is 
present,  which  is  the  expression  of  God's  holy  indignation 
against  sin.  The  law  is  the  form  of  the  enmity  between  God 
and  the  fallen  creatures,  which  came  not  into  existence  from 
the  beginning ;  for  the  promise  was  before  the  law,  in  order 
that  it  might  be  seen  that  grace,  and  not  severity,  was  the 
end  of  the  Fall.  Therefore,  God  pronounced  upon  Eve  and 
Adam,  and  the  earth,  certain  judgments,  under  the  hope  of  a 
redemption  from  them  ;  which  judgments  still  continued  to 
afflict  the  condition  of  men.  But  as  yet  He  gave  not  the 
law ;  and  long  before  He  brought  in  that  excessive  bondage, 
He  had  given  the  covenant  unto  Noah,  and  the  promise 
unto  Abraham.      And  then,  for  greater  manifestation,  and 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  IV.  203 

for  further  punishment  of  sin,  He  imposed  the  law,  which 
came  by  Moses,  and  was  removed  by  Christ.  The  law, 
therefore,  is  the  great  sign  and  standing  monument  of  God's 
unreconciled  mind  towards  men.  Most  necessary  therefore  it 
is,  that  I  should  set  forth,  under  this  head  of  the  atonement 
and  reconciliation,  how  we  are  delivered  from  law,  and  placed 
under  grace.  In  the  course  of  which  demonstration,  it  will 
appear  how  futile,  how  idle  and  profitless,  are  the  notions  of 
those  who  will  not  receive  the  method  of  the  Incarnation,  by 
the  personal  union  of  the  Divine  nature  and  fallen  human 
nature ;  and  new  strength  will  be  brought  to  the  orthodox 
doctrine  which  we  maintain. 

To  open  this  subject  fairly,  it  will  be  necessary  to  go  back 
a  little  in  the  history  of  creation  and  redemption,  of  which  I 
have  demonstrated,  in  the  former  discourse,  the  great  end  to 
be  the  glory  of  God.  And  into  that  general  subject  I  mean 
not  to  inquire  further,  but  am  willing  to  discourse  somewhat 
particularly  concerning  the  scheme,  as  it  hath  relation  unto 
the  law.  The  very  end  of  the  Fall  was  to  put  the  proper 
difference  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature ;  and  to  shew 
the  creature  that  the  source  and  the  continuance  of  its  being 
was  from  God,  and  not  in  any  way  from  itself  If  any  one 
ask  me.  And  could  not  this,  without  a  fall,  have  been  accom- 
plished ?  I  am  ready  to  answer,  As  to  that  I  cannot  tell ; 
but  I  believe  that  this  was  the  best  way  of  accomplishing  it. 
The  creature  being  put  to  silence,  and  its  pretensions  to  power 
and  being,  in  itself,  entirely  negatived  by  sin  and  death,  God 
proceeded  by  demonstrations  of  His  grace  to  make  known, 
even  from  the  beginning,  His  own  Son  incarnate  in  the  crea- 
ture, as  the  only  object  of  its  hope  for  deliverance,  and  the 
only  source  of  its  strength  for  endurance  ;  or,  in  one  word,  as 
the  life.  Of  this  grace  the  promise,  and  the  possession  also, 
was  first  given  unto  Abraham  ;  wherefore  he  is  emphatically 
called  by  the  apostle,  "  He  that  had  received  the  promises." 
Anterior  to  Abraham,  the  world  was  not  without  witnesses  ; 
yet  Abraham  is  called  the  Father  of  the  Faithful,  and  from 
him  the  dispensation  of  righteousness  imputed  unto  faith,  is 
always  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  made  to  begin.  Abraham  is 
the  head  of  the  Church,  or  election,  and  answereth  in  his  cir- 


204       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

cumcised  person  unto  the  baptized  persons  now  in  the  world  ; 
but  before  Abraham,  the  world,  the  whole  race,  had  been 
brought  under  covenant  in  the  person  of  Noah,  whose  pre- 
servation in  the  ark,  with  all  his  house,  and  with  all  the  crea- 
tures of  the  earth,  is  significant  of  that  common  preservation 
of  mankind,  and  deliverance  from  the  power  and  thraldom  of 
sin  and  Satan,  which  Christ  purchased  by  His  death,  whereby 
He  is  said  to  be  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  and  the  propitiation, 
not  for  our  sins  only,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world. 
And  that  sanctification  of  blood,  which  was  part  of  the  cove- 
nant with  Noah,  giving  unto  sacrifice  its  peculiar  sanctity,  doth 
point  unto  the  blood  of  Christ,  as  the  propitiation  and  purchase 
of  man's  life,  and  the  life  of  the  world  he  dwelleth  on,  from  the 
just  and  righteous  indignation  of  God ;  so  that,  as  in  Abraham 
you  have  the  election  according  to  grace  standing  represented, 
in  Noah  you  have  the  redeemed  race  likewise  standing  re- 
presented ;  and  therefore  the  present  constitution  of  the  world 
and  the  Church,  which  hath  obtained  since  the  coming  of 
Christ,  had  its  existence  in  promise  and  expectation,  even  from 
the  deluge  ; — sacrifice  being  unto  all  men  the  proclamation 
of  the  One  Sacrifice,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world ; 
and  circumcision,  or  the  putting  away  the  filth  of  the  flesh, 
being  the  proclamation  unto  the  Church,  of  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  to  crucify  the  flesh,  with  its  corruptions  and  lusts. 
Here,  then,  from  the  deluge,  we  have  the  world  under  a  dis- 
pensation of  universal  redemption,  with  a  church  in  it  under 
the  dispensation  of  particular  election  ;  and  the  only  difference 
between  our  condition  and  theirs  is  this,  that  theirs  was  pro- 
spective, or  prophetic — ours  partly  retrospective,  and  partly 
prophetic ;  they  looking  forward  unto  Him  that  was  to 
come ;  we  looking  backward  unto  Him  that  is  come,  and  for- 
Avard  unto  the  same  One  that  is  to  come  again.  Thus,  then, 
the  world  stood,  under  general  and  particular  promise  of  grace, 
until  the  time  that  the  Law  was  given.  Now,  be  it  observed, 
that  the  Law  was  not  given  unto  all  the  world,  but  only  unto 
the  Church,  the  circumcised  Church.  It  went  not  to  the 
bounds  of  the  covenant  of  Noah,  but  was  confined  within  the 
limits  of  the  covenant  of  Abraham.  And  why  this  limitation  .-' 
For  many  reasons,  but  chiefly  for  this,  that  the  Jew  might 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  IV.  205 

have  no  reason  to  boast  himself  over  the  Gentile,  that  they 
who  had  the  covenants  of  promise  might  also  have  the  con- 
demnation of  the  law ;  that,  their  sins  being  made  to  abound 
through  the  law,  they  might  be  preserved  as  much  as  pos- 
sible from  self-righteousness,  and  taught  to  prize  the  special  and 
peculiar  grace  which  they  had  in  the  covenant  of  circumcision. 
And  the  world  which  was  without  law  was  left  to  the  law 
written  on  their  hearts,  to  the  excusing  or  the  accusing  of 
their  own  thoughts  ;  they  that  are  without  law  being  judged 
without  law.  Hence  it  is,  that  the  apostle,  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Romans,  being  minded  to  prove  all  men  under  sin,  and 
the  whole  world  guilty  before  God,  doth  make  his  case  out 
against  the  world,  in  the  first  chapter,  by  shewing  their  sins 
against  conscience  and  against  nature ;  but  against  the  Jews 
he  maketh  out  his  case  by  shewing  their  sins  against  the  Law. 
The  Law  is  the  voice  of  God,  telling  us  of  the  evil.  When 
man  fell,  he  came  to  know  both  good  and  evil,  whereas  for- 
merly he  had  known  only  good  ;  this  goodness,  being  all  de- 
parted out  of  the  physical  world,  had  its  visible  object  only  in 
hope  of  seeing  Christ,  and  being  goodness  unto  the  undeserv- 
ing, it  hath  the  name  of  grace.  Unto  the  knowledge  and 
desire  of  good  in  man,  Christ  therefore  was  addressed,  and 
God  in  Christ.  Unto  the  evil  that  is  in  man,  the  world  which 
is  seen  was  addressed ;  and  thus  religion  came  into  contro- 
versy with  worldliness,  and  the  future  into  controversy  with 
the  present — the  object  of  good  being  in  the  future,  the  object 
of  evil  being  in  the  present  visible  world.  Now,  with  which  of 
these  doth  the  Law  rank  .''  Holdeth  it  of  the  conscience  of 
good,  or  of  the  conscience  of  evil  ?  I  say  it  holdeth  of  the 
conscience  of  evil.  If  the  gospel  be  the  voice  of  God  ad- 
dressed unto  the  conscience  of  good,  then,  I  say,  the  law  is  the 
voice  of  God  addressed  unto  the  conscience  of  evil.  And  out 
of  this  opposition,  between  the  law  and  the  gospel  arose  that 
heretical  notion  ih  the  primitive  Church,  that  the  law  was 
created  by  the  evil  principle,  and  the  gospel  created  by  the 
good.  The  law  is  by  the  apostle  absolutely  called  sin,  even 
as  Christ,  when  under  the  law,  is  likewise  called  sin.  And 
that  the  law  hath  sin,  and  not  righteousness,  for  its  object,  is 
well  declared  in  that  passage,  Rom.  v.  13,  "  Until  the  law,  sin 


206       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD  : 

was  in  the  world  ;  but  sin  is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no 
law."  And  that  it  hath  not  righteousness  for  its  object  is  de- 
clared in  that  passage,  "  If  righteousness  could  come  by  the 
law,  then  is  Christ  dead  in  vain."  The  law,  therefore,  was 
added,  that  the  offence  might  abound,  and  that  sin  might  be 
shewn  to  be  exceeding  sinful. 

But  before  entering  at  large  upon  this  subject,  I  would  have 
it  confirmed  under  sanction  of  the  written  word  ;  and  to  this 
end,  I  ask  you  to  turn  with  me  to  the  7th  chapter  of  the 
Romans,  from  the  beginning.  "  Know  ye  not,  brethren,  (for 
I  speak  to  them  that  know  the  law,)  how  that  the  law  hath 
dominion  over  a  man  as  long  as  he  liveth  (or,  it  liveth)  ?  For 
a  woman  which  hath  an  husband  is  bound  by  the  law  to  her 
husband  so  long  as  he  liveth ;  but  if  the  husband  be  dead, 
she  is  loosed  from  the  law  of  her  husband.  So  then  if, 
while  her  husband  liveth,  she  be  married  to  another  man, 
she  shall  be  called  an  adulteress  :  but  if  her  husband  be  dead, 
she  is  free  from  that  law ;  so  that  she  is  no  adulteress,  though 
she  be  married  to  another  man.  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  ye 
also  are  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ ;  that 
ye  should  be  married  to  another,  even  to  him  who  is  raised 
from  the  dead,  that  we  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God."  In 
these  verses,  the  Church  is  set  forth  as  a  wife  who  hath 
been  twice  married :  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  law ;  in  the 
second  instance,  to  Him  that  is  raised  from  the  dead  ;  of  whom 
the  former  husband  must  be  dead  before  she  can  be  wedded 
unto  the  second.  But  seeing  that  we  are  wedded  unto  the 
risen  Christ,  the  apostle  affirmeth  that  either  the  law  is  dead 
or  the  Church  an  adulteress.  Now,  how  doth  the  law  become 
dead  to  us,  and  we  dead  to  the  law .-'  Himself  answereth  the 
question, — By  the  body  of  Christ,  which  nailed  the  law  along 
with  Himself  unto  the  cross,  took  it  into  the  grave,  and  left  it 
there,  along  with  His  body  of  sin  and  death,  when  He  took 
His  body  of  life  and  righteousness.  And  so,  bridegroom-like, 
in  beautiful  garments  He  went  forth  from  His  chamber,  like 
a  strong  man  rejoicing  to  run  His  race  of  glory  and  of  might. 
Unto  Him,  then,  not  in  humanity  under  the  law,  but  unto 
Him  in  glory  above  all  law.  Lord  of  all,  the  Church  is  now 
married,  to  the  end  that  we  should  bring  forth  fruit   unto 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  207 

God.  Wedded  unto  this  Husband,  branches  of  this  Vine,  the 
Church  bringeth  forth  much  fruit  unto  God,  whereby  the 
Father  is  glorified.  But  being  wedded  unto  the  law,  what  is 
the  fruit  that  she  bringeth  forth }  A  fruit  unto  death,  in 
direct  contrast  to  the  former.  For  is  it  not  written  in  the 
next  verse,  "  When  we  were  in  the  flesh,  the  motions  of  sin 
(or  as  it  is  in  the  margin,  the  passions  of  sin),  which  are  by 
the  law,  did  work  with  energy  in  our  members,  unto  the  end 
of  fruitbearing  for  death  ? "  What  a  word  is  this  to  those  who 
will  live  under  the  law !  It  is  here  expressly  declared,  that 
the  law  is  the  seed  of  sin,  which  doth  quicken  the  substance  of 
sin, already  in  our  flesh, and  make  it  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death; 
not  unto  God,  but  unto  death.  Now,  this  is  the  reason  for  which 
I  am  setting  my  face  steadfastly  against  the  law;  because  it 
is  the  masculine  parent  of  sin,  and  doth  awaken  and  fructify 
the  passion  for  sin  which  is  in  the  flesh.  It  is  the  life  of  the 
flesh,  the  joy  of  the  flesh  ;  and  where  works  are  preached,  the 
natural  man  is  glad.  Now  what  saith  the  apostle  further  in 
this  most  wonderful  and  curious  discourse,  concerning  the 
law  }  Verse  6  :  "  Now,  however,  are  we  delivered  from  the 
law,  that  being  dead  wherein  we  were  held  ;  that  we  should 
serve  in  newness  of  spirit,  and  not  in  the  oldness  of  the 
letter."  Can  anything  be  more  explicit  to  declare  our  deliver- 
ance from  the  law,  and  the  law's  deadness  to  us,  and  our 
deadness  unto  it  .■*  Can  anything  be  more  joyful  unto  the 
uncarnal  and  spiritual  man,  than  such  a  deliverance  from  that 
which  engendereth  in  the  flesh  only  sin  and  death }  "  We 
are  delivered  from  the  law,  that  being  dead,"  or,  as  it  is  in  the 
margin,  "  being  dead  to  that  wherein  we  were  held."  And 
what  is  the  fruit  of  this  deliverance  }  Is  it  licence .''  No  ; 
but  it  is  liberty.  Is  it  adultery }  No  ;  but  it  is  honourable 
and  fruitful  marriage.  Subjection  unto  the  spiritual  Parent 
of  good  in  our  spirit,  and  deliverance  from  the  parent  of  sin 
in  our  flesh.  Yes;  there  is  a  service  still :  but  it  is  service  not 
known  until  the  Spirit  was  given,  or  but  dimly  known  by 
those  who  being  under  the  law,  yet  forgat  not  that  they  were 
under  the  promise, — service  in  newness  of  spirit,  and  not  in 
oldness  of  the  letter.  The  willing  obedience  of  the  law  of 
liberty,  "  written,  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living 


2o8       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD: 

God ;  not  in  tables  of  stone,  but  on  the  fleshly  tables  of  the 
heart."  Hear  the  divine  apostle,  still  farther,  upon  his  favou- 
rite theme ;  hear  the  great  law-breaker,  the  great  law-de- 
stroyer, and  magnifier  of  the  grace  of  God,  who  boasteth 
that  he  had  destroyed  the  law,  and  looketh  upon  himself 
as  a  most  heinous  transgressor,  if  he  should  lay  a  stone  to 
rear  it  up  again,  saying,  "  For  if  I  build  again  the  things  which 
I  destroyed,  I  make  myself  a  transgressor,"  (verse  7.)  "  What 
shall  we  say  then  ?  Is  the  law  sin  ?  Be  it  not  spoken,  but 
sin  I  had  not  known  except  by  means  of  the  law ;  for  cove- 
tousness  had  I  not  seen,  except  the  law  had  said.  Thou  shalt 
not  covet.  Sin,  however,  taking  occasion  by  the  command- 
ment, wrought  in  me  all  covetousness ;  for  without  the  law, 
sin  were  dead."  This  is  marvellous  exceedingly.  The  apostle 
acquits  the  law  of  the  sin,  which  he  had  asserted  was  bred 
between  the  law  and  the  flesh  :  he  will  not  allow  the  law 
to  be  sin  in  itself,  though  the  occasion  of  sin  in  him,  as  it  were 
awakening  it  from  its  dormancy ;  yea,  he  saith,  quickening  it 
from  its  death;  for  without  the  law  sin  was  dead,  even  as  unto 
a  wicked  lustful  person  the  most  virtuous  object  is  the  occa- 
sion of  sin,  without  any  .sin  in  itself,  but  contrariwise  haply 
the  greatest  aversion  to  it.  So  the  apostle  doth  set  forth  the  • 
pure  and  holy  law,  the  beautiful  and  perfect  law,  the  chaste 
virtuous  and  severe  law,  as  the  occasion  of  all  sin  in  the  weak 
and  sinful  flesh  of  man.  And  as  an  instance  of  it,  he  quoteth 
the  Christian  commandment,  which  forbiddeth  covetousness 
of  everything  that  is  our  neighbour's ;  and  he  declares  not 
merely,  that  he  would  not  have  hwwn  the  sin  of  covetousness, 
but  that  he  would  not  have  see7i  it,  had  it  not  been  for  that 
commandment  which  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet:"  but  so  soon 
as  he  knew  that  same  commandment,  sin  in  him  stirred  up  all 
manner  of  covetousness  and  concupiscence,  spiting  as  it  were 
the  commandment  of  God,  shewing  herself  to  be  mistress  of 
the  flesh,  and  more  powerful  than  the  commandment.  As  an 
usurper,  Pharaoh,  for  example,  rageth  more  against  his  slaves, 
when  the  idea  or  hope  of  liberty  stirreth  amongst  them ;  so  sin, 
potent  empress  of  the  flesh,  kindleth  into  fury,  and  violently 
rageth,  and  worketh  all  manner  of  contradiction  and  contra- 
vention of  that  holy  law,  which  the  flesh  knoweth  to  be  good. 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  209 

but  skilleth  not  to  keep,  because  it  is  overruled  by  another, 
and  by  a  greater  than  itself.  Great  idea !  blessed  God,  and 
likewise  favoured  man,  from  whom,  and  through  whom,  this 
great  idea  came !  Let  my  soul  learn  to  embrace  it,  and  to 
possess  it.  Let  me  forget  the  law  that  I  may  remember  my 
risen  Lord,  for  I  cannot  be  married  unto  them  both.  Let  me 
cease  from  the  commandment,  that  I  may  cease  from  sin. 
Let  me  die  unto  the  law,  that  I  may  live  unto  Christ ;  for,  as 
saith  the  blessed  apostle,  "  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the 
law,  that  I  may  live  unto  God!"  Now,  brethren,  tell  me 
whether  you  think  the  language  of  such  divines  as  Luther, 
the  language  of  such  preachers  as  myself  be,  or  be  not,  con- 
sentaneous with  the  language  of  the  blessed  apostle. 

Taking  this  text  for  our  warrant,  we  would  now  set  our- 
selves to  discourse  concerning  the  law  and  its  removal  from 
the  Church  ;  for  the  law  is  the  form  of  the  enmity  which  came 
by  Moses,  between  the  holiness  of  God  and  the  wickedness  of 
the  fallen  creature. 

There  is  in  the  law  such  a  purity  and  fitness  for  producing 
human  well-being ;  there  is  so  much  good  sense  in  the  Ten 
Commandments,  so  much  right  feeling,  so  much  beauty  of 
virtue  and  righteous  judgment,  that  every  good  and  wise  man 
seeketh  earnestly  and  desireth  fervently  to  put  himself  under 
such  a  goodly  system  of  morality,  which  is  at  once  the  per- 
fection of  moral  philosophy,  the  code  of  justice,  the  guide  of 
affection,  the  sum  of  religion,  the  bulwark  of  society,  and  the 
stay  of  life ;  insomuch  that  I  know  not  what  preternatural 
power  is  required  to  separate  a  man  from  this  form  of  wis- 
dom, which  is  all  redolent  with  humanity,  and  with  humanity's 
noblest  forms.  The  only  thing  capable  of  divorcing  between 
the  moral  law  and  human  nature  is  the  inexorable  holiness  of 
God,  which  will  not  be  satisfied  with  anything  short  of  its 
complete  obedience.  If  the  law  would  relax  a  little  to  the 
infirmities  of  the  flesh  ;  if  it  would  be  gentle,  and  tender,  and 
gracious,  and  look  not  so  much  to  our  shortcomings  as  to  our 
attainments  ;  or  if  it  would  tarry  a  while  and  wait  the  gradual 
progress  of  virtue ;  or  if  it  would  forget  the  past  transgres- 
sions in  our  present  endeavour  to  do  our  best ;  or  if,  more- 
over, it  would  quietly  stand  like  a  Grecian  temple,  or  a 
VOL.  V.  O 


2 1  o       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

Grecian  statue,  as  the  ideal,  the  beau  ideal,  of  moral  beauty 
and  perfection,  and  suffer  us  poor  sculptors  to  carry  on  the 
work  of  moulding  ourselves  the  best  we  can  after  the  model 
of  its  beauty,  then  indeed  it  might  stand  and  receive  the 
homage  of  all  virtuous  and  well-disposed  men.  But  it  hath 
such  a  tongue  of  iron,  and  doth  ring  out  again  such  thun- 
ders of  revenge  against  every  transgression,  and  every  short- 
coming it  doth  gauge  with  such  exact  rule,  and  such  a 
mighty  omniscient  eye  doth  watch  sleepless  over  its  virgin 
purity,  that  while,  on  the  one  hand,  it  doth  solicit  and 
attract  with  its  perfect  form,  on  the  other  it  doth  repel 
with  its  chill  and  icy  coldness.  God's  inexorable  holi- 
ness, I  say,  is  that  which  maketh  the  very  beauty  of  the 
law,  and  its  perfection,  to  be  most  horrible  and  most  revolt- 
ing unto  the  heart  of  a  believer.  But  if  we  could  but  per- 
suade ourselves  that  God's  holiness  would  relent,  and  that  He 
would  soften  and  accommodate  the  law  to  our  infirmities, 
all  might  yet  be  well ;  and  this  truly  is  the  hope  and  belief 
of  all  those  who  are  making  shift  with  the  law  for  a  rule  of 
life.  They  do,  in  very  deed,  believe  that  God  is  not  so  holy, 
but  that  He  is  able  to  forgive  a  transgression  of  the  law,  and 
to  overlook  our  shortcomings  from  its  obedience.  And  this 
notion  is  so  firmly  rooted  in  men's  minds,  that  nothing  but  a 
great  demonstration  to  the  contrary  could  overcome  it.  Men 
have  no  right  estimate  of  the  evil  of  sin,  of  the  holiness  of 
God,  of  the  inexorableness  of  the  law ;  and  before  you  can 
wean  human  nature  from  the  contemplation  of  its  own  per- 
fection, and  perfectibility  in  the  law,  you  must  have  to  offer 
unto  them  some  indubitable  demonstration  and  stupendous 
monument  of  the  unalterable  holiness  of  God,  the  irreducible 
demands  of  the  law,  and  the  hideous  nature  of  sin.  If  such 
a  demonstration  and  monument  of  a  lasting  kind  can  be 
given,  and  established  in  some  grand  and  conspicuous  way, 
it  may  be  possible ;  but  otherwise  it  never  will  be  possible  to 
divorce  human  nature  from  the  high-minded  affections  which 
it  beareth  to  the  good,  and  just,  and  honourable  law,  and 
the  easy  hope  with  which  it  flattereth  its  good  nature,  that 
God  will  never  require  of  His  poor  creatures  more  than  they 
are  able  in  this  state  of  sin  and  infirmity  to  perform,  espe- 


B  Y  REMO  VAL  OF  THE  LAW.  211 

cially  when  He  beholdeth  in  them  a  devout  aspiration  after 
the  perfect  and  blameless  righteousness  of  the  law,  together 
with  a  continual  sorrow  and  repentance  because  of  our  many- 
shortcomings  and  positive  offences.     But  if,  I  say,  it  can  be 
made  to  appear,  beyond  doubt  and  question,  that  he  that 
offendeth  in  one  point  of  the  law  is  guilty  of  all ;  that  heaven 
and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  not 
pass  from  the  law  till  all  be  fulfilled  ;  and  that  God  cannot 
forgive  a  transgression,  the  slightest  as  the  heaviest,  without 
a  recompense  of  an  infinite  price ;  and  that  as  one  transgres- 
sion brought  the  world  and  all  its  inhabitants  into  this  misery 
and  death,  out  of  life  and  blessedness,  so  any  one  transgres- 
sion will  condemn  the  soul  into  the  lowest  hell  for  ever; 
and  that  this  is  God's  unalterable,  unchangeable  being  and 
attribute  ; — if  this,  I  say,  can  be  made  clearly  apparent,  and 
undoubtedly  true  and  unchangeable  for  ever,  then  men  may 
be  brought  to  see  the  law  in  another  light,  and  to  abhor  it 
as  a  living  man  abhorreth  the  dagger  of  the  assassin,  or  the 
axe  of  the  executioner,  or  the  grim  face  of  death,  or  the  cor- 
ruption of  the  grave,  or  the  pit  of  hell.     Now,  I  asic,  where, 
by  what,  hath  God  made  this  eternal  demonstration  of  sin's 
horrid  guilt,  and  His  own   inexpressible  abhorrence  of  the 
sinner .-'     I   answer.  By  sending  His  Son  in  the  likeness   of 
sinful  flesh  ;  by  making  the  Word  flesh ;   by  making  Him 
consubstantial  with  the  sinner,  and  shewing  how  under  this 
form  God    hid    His  face  from    His  own   Son,   and  bruised 
Him,  and  put  Him  to  grief,  and  called  for  His  sword  to  slay 
Him,  and  covered  Him  with  the  pall  of  death,  and  brought 
Him  into  the  humiliation  of  the  grave ; — all  this,  though  He 
was  without  sin,  and   saw   not  corruption,  merely  because 
He   had   become  consubstantial   with  the   sinful   creatures. 
Thus,  and  no  otherwise,  was  that  great  demonstration  made. 
And  I  stand  in  my  place,  as  a  preacher  of  truth,  and  say, 
that  there  is  no  demonstration  of  all  this,  if  Christ  did  not 
become  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh  ;  if  He  were 
in  any  other  state  than  the  fallen  humanity  ;  if  He  were  in 
the  likeness  of  sinless  flesh,  and  not  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh. 

Let  us  for  a  moment  suppose  that  Christ  came  in  an  im- 


2 1 2       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

mortal  and  incorruptible  body  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  nature 
of  man  before  he  fell ;  I  have  then  to  ask,  in  addition  to  all 
that  hath  been  said  above,  what  demonstration  would  be 
given  of  God's  holy  indignation  against  a  fallen  sinful  crea- 
ture, if  so  be  that  Christ  was  in  the  immortal  and  incorruptible 
state  of  manhood  ?  A  demonstration  indeed  is  given  of  God's 
wrath  against  an  unfallen  creature,  bearing  a  fallen  creature's 
sin  ;  but  we  want  the  demonstration  of  God's  wrath  upon 
a  fallen  creature  himself  We  are  not  unfallen  creatures, 
bearing  another's  sin  ;  but  we  are  fallen  creatures,  bearing 
our  own.  And  the  thing  to  be  demonstrated  unto  us  is,  that 
God  will  take  vengeance  upon  our  iniquities,  without  making 
any,  the  least  abatement  for  our  fallen  state.  This  is  the 
very  shelter  which  human  nature  constructs  for  herself;  and 
out  of  this  shelter  she  must  be  driven,  before  she  will  forsake 
self-righteousness  and  self-confidence.  For  hear  what  the 
natural  man  saith,  "Will  God  require  of  me,  born  in  sin  and 
infirmity,  and  dwelling  in  this  sinful  world,  perfection  .''  and  say 
you  that  He  will  visit  my  slightest  transgression  with  eternal 
death  V  The  thing  which  we  want  is  to  be  able  to  say  to  the 
natural  man,  "  Yea,  verily,  thine  every  sin  eternally  separates 
between  thee  and  God,  and  eternally  doometh  thee  unto 
wrath."  Now  this  answer  cannot  be  given,  if  Christ  had  not 
a  fallen  humanity  ;  verily  our  humanity ;  verily  the  natural 
man  ;  for  an  unfallen  humanity,  or  a  redeemed  humanity, 
is  not  the  thing  in  question.  "True,"  the  natural  man  saith, 
"  an  unfallen  man  may  be,  ought  to  be  perfect ;  but  there  is 
the  widest  difference  between  an  unfallen  and  a  fallen  man. 
And  by  loading  an  unfallen  man  with  ever  so  much  sin  of 
another,  you  do  not  make  him  a  fallen  man  ;  and  that  he 
should  bear  it,  and  that  he  should  keep  the  law  without 
offence,  is  no  proof  to  me  that  I  shall  be  called  to  keep  the 
same  law,  with  the  same  strictness,  or  that  I  shall  be  visited 
so  fearfully  for  every  transgression  of  the  same.  Besides,  we 
want  no  demonstration  of  what  God  requires  of  unfallen  man- 
hood, or  what  visitation  its  sins  are  to  be  visited  withal,  for 
we  have  it  already  in  Adam.  We  are  the  monuments  there- 
of ;  the  world  is  the  monument  thereof ;  but  is  there  to  be 
no  allowance  for  the  wide  difference  between  our  state  and 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  IV.  213 

Adam's  ?  Are  you  to  expect  from  a*  miserable  sinner  the 
same  straitness  and  completeness  of  holiness  as  from  a  being 
whom  God  created  good,  and  constituted  lord  of  the  lower 
earth?"  These  are  the  questions  to  be  resolved,  as  I  have 
said  above,  before  you  can  drive  men  from  trusting  in  the 
law,  and  in  their  own  keeping  of  the  law  ;  and  these  are 
questions  which  can  be  resolved  only  by  a  demonstration 
made  in  our  fallen  manhood.  They  understand  nothing  at 
all  of  the  problem  to  be  resolved,  who  say  that  it  could  be 
resolved  in  the  unfallen  manhood,  or  in  the  angelic  or  in  the 
archangelic  form  of  being. 

Furthermore,  I  confess  myself  unable  to  perceive  how  it  is 
possible  for  suffering  to  reach  an  unfallen  creature  without 
subverting  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Divine  purpose 
and  administration.  I  do  not  mean  the  principle  how  the 
enternal  Son  should  consent  and  condescend  to  the  suffering 
and  humiliation ;  for  this,  indeed.  He  doth  in  the  plenitude  of 
His  own  Divine  freedom  ;  but  the  difficulty,  and  impossibility 
as  I  think,  is,  how  the  suffering  should  reach  Him  otherwise 
than  by  a  fallen  body.  This  is  the  very  end  of  the  Fall,  that 
Christ  might  come  at  suffering.  The  Godhead  cannot  suffer, 
because  it  cannot  change.  Those  sufferings  which  Christ 
underwent  reached  Him  through  His  creature-part.  Now,  if 
that  creature-part  of  Christ  was  in  the  unfallen  state,  how 
should  it  suffer  ?  If  the  unfallen  creature  can  suffer,  then  is 
there  no  difference  between  the  unfallen  and  the  fallen ;  for 
suffering  and  death  are  the  signs  and  the  wages  of  the  fall. 
The  answer  which  they  make  to  this  question  is.  He  suffered 
for  the  sins  of  others.  That  I  say  also,  because  He  had  no 
sin  of  His  own  wherefor  to  suffer.  On  this  we  are  agreed ; 
but  my  question  is.  How  can  suffering  for  another  reach  an 
unfallen  creature  ?  I  know  of  no  way  by  which  suffering  can 
reach  an  unfallen  creature,  but  by  the  way  in  which  it  reached 
Adam — namely,  by  his  committing  sin  ;  and  if  it  be  said,  that 
without  committing  sin,  suffering  can  reach  an  unfallen  crea- 
ture, then  the  only  difference  between  the  unfallen  and  fallen 
is  taken  away,  and  the  very  nature  of  sin,  as  an  act  of  the  will, 
is  abrogated.  But  that  suffering  can  come  to  a  fallen  crea- 
ture, without  any  sinful  act  of  his  own,  is  manifest  in  every 


2 1 4       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD : 

child  that  is  born  ;  and  that  death  can  come  to  a  fallen  crea- 
ture, without  any  sinful  act  of  its  own,  is  manifest  in  every 
child  that  dies.  And,  therefore,  there  is  no  difficulty  what- 
ever in  believing  that,  without  any  sinful  act  of  the  will,  Christ 
in  a  fallen  nature  should  both  suffer  and  die,  because  this  very 
thing  is  the  universal  experience  of  every  fallen  creature. 
But  there  is  not  such  a  thing  in  the  records  of  being,  as  that 
an  unfallen  creature  should  suffer.  The  will  must  fall  first  by 
sinning,  before  suffering  can  be  felt.  But  that,  in  the  fallen 
state,  the  just  should  suffer  for  the  unjust,  and  the  innocent  for 
the  guilty,  is  the  great  truth  experienced  of  all ;  seeing  God  visits 
the  sin  of  the  fathers,  and  the  sin  of  Adam  especially,  upon 
those  who  have  as  yet  no  power  of  will  whereby  to  com- 
mit a  sin ;  so  that  I  may  truly  say  the  whole  history  and 
constitution  of  man's  estate,  under  the  fall,  is  to  the  very  end 
of  schooling  us  into  the  method  of  the  incarnation,  of  teach- 
ing us  how,  without  evil  actings  of  the  will,  suffering  and 
death  may  be  experienced  by  a  creature  in  the  fallen  state. 
If  Christ  therefore  took  our  fallen  nature ;  if  the  eternal 
Godhead,  being  purposed  to  extirpate  sin  and  death  from 
flesh  for  ever,  and  to  bear  up  through  His  almighty  and 
divine  strength,  the  lapsed  creation :  it  is  easy  to  perceive 
how,  by  taking  part  of  flesh  and  blood  with  the  fallen 
children.  He  might  do  so  :  but  if,  by  taking  an  unfallen  na- 
ture, He  could  do  so,  then  have  I  no  demonstration  whatever 
that  I  myself  am  fallen.  For  what  proveth  me  to  be  fallen  } 
suffering  and  death.  If  it  be  added,  Positive  transgression  of 
my  will }  I  answer.  No  ;  that  should  not  enter  into  the  defi- 
nition of  a  fallen  creature ;  because  it  applieth  not  to  all 
fallen  creatures,  nor  indeed  to  any  fallen  creature  in  all  its 
being.  Children,  and  all  men  while  children,  are  incapable 
of  acting  good  or  evil  by  the  will,  and  yet  they  arc  fallen. 
And  how  know  we  them  to  be  fallen }  because  they  suffer 
and  die.  But  if  an  unfallen  creature  can  likewise  suffer  and 
die,  then  the  only  definition,  and  the  only  proof,  of  a  fallen 
creature  is  taken  away ;  and  if  this  be  taken  away,  then  re- 
demption is  likewise  taken  away.  Now,  it  only  makes  this 
conclusion  stronger,  if  they  say  that  the  difference  between 
an  unfallen  creature  suffering  and  a  fallen  creature  suffering 


BY  REMOVAL   OF  THE  LA  W.  215 

is,  that  the  one  suffereth  by  imputation  and  the  other  suffereth 
not  by  imputation  but  for  his  own  sin.  Then  I  say,  that  by 
this  definition  children  are  unfallen  ;  for  they  suffer  not  for 
any  sin  of  their  own,  but  by  imputation  of  the  sin  of  their 
fathers,  and  most  especially  the  sin  of  Adam.  Here,  then,  is 
another  great  foundation  subverted — to  wit,  the  difference 
between  the  unfallen  and  fallen  creatures  ;  and  Socinianism 
marches  straight  in  at  the  breach,  which  says  that  we  are  just 
in  as  good  and  perfect  a  state  as  Adam,  and  as  able  to  keep 
the  law  as  he  was  ;  and  then  where  is  the  redemption,  when 
there  is  no  fall  '^.  It  is  completely  avoided,  and  made  of  no 
effect. 

Oh,  it  relieveth  my  heart,  in  the  midst  of  these  painful 
studies  and  deep  meditations,  to  find  that  I  am  fighting  the 
battle  which  the  apostle  John  began,  and  which  the  holy 
fathers  of  the  Church,  for  seven  centuries,  ceased  not  to 
wage.  This  heresy  of  the  immortal  incorruptible  body  of 
Christ,  of  His  supernatural  humanity,  was  broached  by 
Cerdon,  the  disciple  of  that  Simon  Magus  who  is  mentioned 
in  the  Acts :  from  him  it  passed  to  Marcion,  and  Valentine, 
and  Manes,  all  great  heresiarchs :  in  Eutyches  it  took  a  more 
generic  form,  which  was  condemned  in  the  fourth  general 
council  at  Chalcedon.  It  revived  in  the  Emperor  Justinian, 
who  held  that  Jesus  Christ  had  not  a  corruptible  body,  but 
was  resisted  by  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  and  the 
patriarch  of  Antioch,  and  all  the  orthodox  Church,  who  said, 
"  It  cannot  be  called  incorruptible  in  any  other  sense  than  as 
it  was  always  unpolluted  with  any  defilement,  and  was  not 
corrupted  in  the  grave."  It  revived  again  under  the  new 
name  of  the  Monothelites,  concerning  whom  it  is  written  in 
a  former  head  of  this  discourse;  and  after  surviving  for  nearly 
a  century,  it  was  condemned  again,  in  a  general  council,  the 
third  at  Constantinople,  held  in  the  year  680.  And  now, 
again,  behold  it  is  upon  the  field  ;  and  here  I  am,  a  poor 
despised  minister,  contending,  day  by  day,  for  the  faith  for 
which  holy  martyrs  and  apostles  contended  ;  of  whom  it  is 
reported  that  one,  even  Polycarp  the  disciple  of  John,  when 
he  met  one  of  these  heresiarchs — I  think  Marcion — on  the 
streets  of  Rome,  and  being  asked  of  him,  "  Knowest  thou 


2 1 6       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

me?"  the  martyr  answered,  "Yes;    I  know  thee  to  be  the 
eldest  born  of  the  devil." 

Now,  abandon  these  heresies,  and  look  at  the  demon- 
stration as  it  is  in  truth,  and  you  will  see  how  grand  it 
is.  The  eternal  Divinity  of  the  Son,  who  inhabited  the  ful- 
ness and  the  dearness  of  the  Father's  bosom,  to  the  end  of 
shewing  how  holy,  and  good,  and  gracious  His  Father  is,  and 
knowing  well  the  Divine  hatred  against  sin,  as  being  Him- 
self Divine,  and  the  eternal  contradiction  between  God  and 
the  sinful  creature,  as  being  Himself  God,  doth  nevertheless 
take  up  into  His  person  human  nature  in  its  fallen  state,  and 
is  as  truly  a  fallen  man,  as  He  is  truly  God ;  and  thus  the 
eternal  and  absolute  One  enforceth  the  recreant  and  rebel 
nature  of  man  to  keep  the  holy  law  of  God  :  and  the  Father, 
though  loving  Him  beyond  love's  utterance,  in  the  infinite 
degree,  as  being  of  one  substance,  doth  not  the  less  exact 
from  Him  the  utmost  measure  of  a  sufferer's  sufferings  unto 
death  itself;  a  death  of  disgrace,  of  agony,  and  of  torture. 
He  had  no  exemption  because  He  was  God,  but  suffered  be- 
cause He  had  taken  part  with  the  brethren  of  the  suffering 
and  doomed  thing.  If  God  would  ever  have  relaxed,  for  any 
sake,  the  extreme  rigour  of  the  law,  and  the  imperious  curse 
of  death,  would  He  not  have  relaxed  now,  when  the  sufferer 
was  His  own  Son,  holding,  by  His  Divine  nature,  indissoluble 
communion  with  Himself.''  That  Person,  who  suffered  in 
His  human  nature,  did  by  His  Divine  nature  maintain  all  the 
while  perfect  unity  with  the  Father.  There  was  between 
them  perfect  oneness  of  substance  ;  and  yet  the  person  of  the 
Son  suffered  as  a  man  suffereth,  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and 
acquainted  with  grief  He  who  made  the  law.  He  whose 
absolute  will  is  the  parent  of  all  laws,  did  come  under  the 
law,  in  all  respects,  and  did  keep  it  in  all  points.  After  this, 
can  any  one  doubt  that  God  will  exact,  to  the  uttermost  jot 
of  that  law,  from  every  fallen  creature  ?  Why  should  He 
spare  another  who  spared  not  His  own  Son,  His  only-begotten 
and  well-beloved  Son .-'  Beyond  this,  methinks,  demonstra- 
tion of  holiness  cannot  go.  Oh,  what  an  awful  spectacle  unto 
creation  for  ever,  to  see  such  love  as  the  Father  had  unto  His 
Son  postponed  unto  holiness,  set  aside  for  the  manifestation 


B  V  RE  MO  VAL  OF  THE-  LA  W.  2 1  7 

of  justice,  suspended  for  the  honour  of  a  broken  law!  What 
a  word,  then,  is  law !  the  pillar  of  ages,  the  stability  of  worlds, 
the  very  word  of  God !  and  who,  understanding  this,  will 
dream  of  the  frangibility,  or  the  changeableness  of  law  ?  It 
may  not  be  any  longer  thought  or  spoken,  that  the  adaman- 
tine law  will  divide  into  parts :  it  dicth  by  the  loss  of  the 
least  jot;  it  cannot  die  while  God  who  spake  it  endureth. 
Inflexible  law,  inexorable  law,  thou  art  honoured  indeed  ; 
very  venerable  art  thou  become.  Woe,  woe  to  him  that 
toucheth  the  hem  of  thy  skirt,  or  meditateth  the  infringe- 
ment of  thy  integrity.  I  cannot  express,  and  never  shall  be 
able  to  express,  the  sanction  which  Christ  hath  given  to  the 
law.  Truly  He  hath  made  it  honourable.  Behold  also  what 
demonstration  there  is  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  That  sin 
should  poison  life's  fountain,  in  a  creature  created  so  noble  as 
Adam  ;  that  sin  should  poison  the  streams  of  life  in  all  their 
branches ;  that  one  sin  should  engender  from  its  venomous 
drop  enough  of  suffering  to  steep  a  world  in  misery,  is  indeed 
an  awful  truth  ; — but  that  sin  should  be  able  to  struggle  with 
Godhead  itself,  that  a  fragment  of  the  perilous  stuff,  being 
assumed  into  the  personality  of  the  Son,  should  weigh  down 
the  Almighty  One,  from  His  delectation  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  and  make  Him  say,  "  Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me } " 
— that  a  fragment  of  the  perilous  stuff  being  taken  into  the 
person  of  the  Living  One,  Life  of  life,  should  agonise  Him  with 
hunger  and  with  thirst,  and  oppress  Him  with  weariness,  and 
tempt  Him  with  the  round  world's  idle  state  ;  should  make 
the  Divine  person  groan,  and  weep,  and  sweat  great  drops  of 
blood,  and  be  passive  to  all  suffering  which  flesh  is  heir  to  ; 
this  is  the  mightiest  demonstration  of  sin's  iron  gripe  and 
deadly  hold,  proving  it  to  be  all  but  the  mightiest  power  in 
being. 

This,  according  to  the  view  I  have  given  of  it,  is  not,  as  it 
were,  the  accumulation  of  the  sins  of  all  the  elect ;  but  the 
simple,  single,  common  power  of  sin  diffused  throughout,  and 
present  in,  the  substance  of  flesh  of  fallen  human  nature. 
Such  power  hath  sin  in  my  flesh,  in  the  flesh  of  every  one  who 
heareth  me.  They  greatly  err  who  make  this  humiliation  of 
the  Son's  person  to  arise  from  many  thousand  measures  of 


2 1 8       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

sin,  as  it  were,  poured  into  the  cup  of  one  man.     No,  verily ; 
that  which  a  fallen  human  nature  in  Christ  prevailed  to  do 
against  a  Divine  nature,  it  prevaileth  to  do  in  me,  and  in 
every  single  man ;  and  no  power  wdiatsoever,  but  the  Divine 
power  which  prevailed  over  it  in  Christ,  can  prevail  over  it  in 
me.     This  scheme  of  supposing  Christ  to  have  been  laden,  as 
it  were,  with  a  body  that  had  the  sins  of  many  bodies  imputed 
to  it,  doth  take  Him  out  of  our  sphere  again,  and  destroy  the 
application  unto  us,  of  those  things  shewed  forth  in  Him  ;  for 
the  sinner  might  turn  upon  us,  and  say,  That  example  of  the 
sinfulness  of  sin,  which  you  educed  from  Christ,  is  not  appli- 
cable to  me,  who  have  but  my  own  sin  to  bear.     Do  I  speak 
herein  against  imputation  of  our  sins  t  God  forbid.     I  believe 
that  He  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree ;  and  this 
is  a  point  which  I  have  sufficiently  handled  in  my  first  dis- 
course.    It  was  all  our  sin,  and  none  of  it  His  : — it  was  the  sin 
of  flesh  in  general,  in  common,  which  He  freely  undertook  to 
extirpate.     But  what  is  sin  ?    Reflect  what  sin  is.     It  is  not  a 
thing,  nor  a  creature,  but  it  is  the  state  of  a  creature, — the 
second  state  of  a  creature,  in  which  it  is  not  subject  to  the 
law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.     Sin,  therefore,  is  com- 
mon to  us  all :  it  is  the  creature  man  working  against  the 
Creator  God.     And  the  Creator  God,  to  shew  that  He  neither 
had  been  nor  would  be  baffled  by  His  own  creature,  took  it 
up  into  Himself,  and,  having  sanctified  it,  brought  it  through 
the  passage  of  death  without  seeing  corruption,  to  see  immor- 
tality and  unchangeableness.     And  the  measure  of  the  potency 
of  sin,  and  of  its  evil  in  one  man,  in  any  man,  in  all  men,  in 
the  region  of  humanity,  is  the  degree  unto  which  it  humbled 
and  reduced  one  of  the  Persons  of  the  eternal  Godhead.     I 
wonder  what  men  mean  who  will  not  look  at  this,  and  be 
astonied  :    it   passeth   comprehension,   it   passeth   utterance. 
Holy  men  are  lost  in  the  adoration  of  it ;  angels  desire  to  look 
into  it ;  sinners  are  saved  by  it ;  and  none  but  infidels  and 
heretics  withstand  it. 

It  is  very  painful  indeed  to  me,  but  nothing  new,  as  you 
can  testify,  to  witness  the  obstinacy  and  perverseness  with 
which  men  contend  against  this  truth,  that  Christ  came  in  the 
likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  to  condemn  sin  in  the  flesh.     What 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  219 

mean  they  by  their  ignorant  gainsaying  ?  Is  it  not  the 
thing  which  is  to  be  done  in  you  and  me,  sooner  or  later, 
by  God,  that  we  should  be  sanctified  and  redeemed,  this 
very  flesh  of  ours,  by  the  indwelling  and  empowering  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  ?  If  there  be  something  so  shocking  in 
the  Holy  Ghost's  abiding  in  sinful  flesh,  let  those  that 
think  it  so  shocking  do  without  it,  if  they  can,  and  go 
down  into  the  pit  for  ever.  Whether  is  it  more  honourable 
unto  God,  that  He  should  recover  His  creature,  or  lose  His 
creature  ?  And  if  sinful  flesh  is  the  thing  to  be  sanctified 
and  possessed  of  the  Godhead,  shall  not  Christ  in  this  also 
have  the  pre-eminence  ?  or  shall  it  be  done  in  us,  without 
being  first  done  in  Him  ?  But  whence  this  abhorrence  ?  Is 
it  dishonourable  to  vanquish  sin  ?  Doth  the  man  become  a 
serpent  who  graspeth  the  serpent  in  his  gripe,  and  crusheth 
him  ?  Do  I  become  a  devil,  by  wrestling  with  the  devil  and 
overcoming  him  ?  And  doth  Christ  become  sinful,  by  coming 
into  flesh  like  this  of  mine,  extirpating  its  sin,  arresting  its 
corruption,  aad  attaining  for  it  honour  and  glory  for  ever  ? 
Idle  talk !  They  know  not  whether  they  drive.  They  are 
making  void  the  humanity  of  Christ,  and  destroying  His 
mediation  as  virtually  as  if  they  denied  His  Divinity.  A 
mediator  is  not  of  one :  how  truly  he  is  consubstantial  with 
God,  so  truly  is  he  consubstantial  with  me,  or  he  cannot  be 
mediator  between  me  and  God.  The  Daysman  must  be 
able  to  lay  His  hand  on  us  both. 

These  demonstrations  of  the  unalterable  holiness  of  God, 
of  the  inflexible  rigour  of  the  law,  and  the  exceeding  sinful- 
ness of  sin,  which  are  no  demonstrations  at  all  unto  us  avail- 
ing, unless  Christ  be  come  in  our  just  and  exact  nature,  are, 
so  far  as  they  bear  upon  us,  profitable  in  the  highest  degree 
by  destroying  all  hope  of  salvation  through  the  relentings  of 
God,  through  the  yielding  of  the  law,  through  our  obedience 
of  the  law,  or  any  other  method  which  buildeth  upon  God's 
facility  of  disposition,  or  our  own  self-righteousness.  For  if 
God  would  not  relent  in  behalf  of  God,  but  obliged  His  own 
Son,  when  made  flesh,  to  bear  the  rigours  of  the  law,  then 
how  should  He  relent  towards  another  ?  And  if  it  required 
the  informing  Godhead  of  the  Son,  and  the  sustaining  God- 


2  20       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

head  of  the  Spirit,  to  enable  the  man  Jesus  Christ  perfectly 
to  keep  the  law,  how  should  any  mere  man  expect  to 
keep  it  ?  And  if  no  one  may  expect  to  keep  it,  how  should 
any  one  expect  to  be  saved  by  it?  Whosoever,  therefore, 
rightly  apprehendeth  the  incarnation  of  the  Word,  doth  dread 
the  law,  with  revoltings  of  soul,  and  cry  out,  Oh,  thou  inex- 
orable law !  how  shall  I  escape  thy  most  certain  sentence  ? 
Oh,  thou  most  holy  God !  how  shall  I  find  acquittal  from 
thine  offended  law  ?  If  thou  art  strict  to  mark  iniquity,  as 
it  appeareth  by  thy  Son's  experience  in  the  flesh,  then  how 
shall  I  answer  for  one  of  ten  thousand  of  my  transgressions  ? 
I  am  a  lost  man — a  man  lost  and  undone,  unless  that  awful 
law  be  taken  out  of  the  way  for  ever.  If  it  stand,  I  fall ; 
for  I  am  sold  under  sin.  Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death }  Such  is  the 
agony  of  a  man  who  is  enlightened  by  Christ,  in  God's  char- 
acter as  a  sovereign  Lord.  He  is  at  his  wit's  end :  yea, 
it  would  drive  a  man  out  of  his  wits,  as  at  times  it  threat- 
ened to  do  for  poor  Luther,  whose  ideas  of  God  the  Lawgiver 
became  at  times  so  insufferable  to  himself,  that  he  would  run 
howling  from  the  hideous  thought,  and  seek  to  hide  himself 
from  the  fear  of  God.  Paul,  in  like  manner,  in  the  seventh 
chapter  of  the  Romans,  seemeth  to  have  been  all  but  undone, 
by  his  reflections  upon  the  holiness  of  God  the  Lawgiver.  And 
I  would  that  every  one  who  heareth  me,  and  I  myself,  were  in 
likewise  amazed  and  astonished.  There  would  then  be  no  need 
of  argument  to  drive  men  from  the  law  ;  they  would  avoid  it 
as  they  do  consuming  fire.  There  would  be  no  need  of  argu- 
ments to  persuade  men  to  take  refuge  in  grace :  they  would 
snatch  at  it,  and  fasten  such  hold  upon  it  as  the  drowning 
man  doth  upon  the  lifeboat  which  hath  arrived  just  in  time 
to  save  him  from  the  yawning  waves.  Then  would  the  world 
know  what  that  word  meaneth,  "  The  law  came  by  Moses,  but 
grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ." 

What,  then,  is  to  become  of  that  inexorable  law  .-*  and  what 
is  to  become  of  us,  whom  it  damneth  to  the  lowest  hell  .-* 
Christ,  for  His  part,  hath  kept  the  law,  and  made  it  honour- 
able ;  but  we  in  weak  flesh,  what  can  we  do  to  keep  it } 
Nothing  whatsoever.     We  do  but  mangle  it ;  we  do  but  dis- 


B  V  REMO  VAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  221 

honour  it ;  we  do  but  enrage  it,  and  deceive  ourselves.  Will 
it  not  call  out  against  us  then  ?  Yea,  and  it  doth.  And 
Avhat,  then,  is  to  be  done  ?  We  must  die,  and  see  corruption. 
Our  natural  man  must  die,  and  the  law  will  be  satisfied ;  for 
the  law  hath  claims  upon  the  natural  man  alone.  If  my 
concupiscence  die,  if  my  covetousness  die,  if  my  destructive- 
ness  die,  what  more  would  the  law  ?  In  one  word,  if  my  flesh 
be  crucified,  what  more  would  the  law  ?  Now  this  is  what 
taketh  place  in  every  one  that  believeth  in  Christ,  according 
to  the  principle  of  imputation  laid  down  above ;  that,  as  by 
Adam  came  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  so  by  Christ  came 
deliverance  from  its  weakness :  or  rather,  in  Christ's  death  all 
flesh  died,  and  the  law  was  satisfied.  The  law  bore  its  spite 
against  sin  in  flesh  :  Christ  condemned  sin  in  flesh :  the  law 
could  not  do  it,  Christ  did  it  for  the  law ;  or  rather  He  did  it 
for  the  Lawgiver,  even  His  Father,  of  whose  holiness  the  law 
is  the  bearing  and  the  pressure  upon  sinful  flesh.  As  the  sin 
of  Adam  did  not  need  to  be  done  over  again  in  every  person 
of  Adam's  kind,  but  by  the  principle  of  imputation  death 
passed  upon  all  men,  and  the  law  appeared  in  due  time  to 
shew  the  abundance  of  the  transgression ;  so  neither  doth  the 
work  of  righteousness,  under  the  law,  need  to  be  done  over 
again  :  but,  being  once  done  in  Christ,  is  for  ever  done  ;  and 
the  law  being  satisfied  with  Christ,  giveth  itself  up  to  Christ, 
and  saith.  Thou,  O  man,  art  worthy  to  have,  to  hold,  to  exer- 
cise me,  thou  great  Lord  of  law  !  And  Christ  having  become 
sole  proprietor  of  the  law,  doth  say,  in  His  own  right.  Stand 
aside,  thou  grace-eclipsing  law  :  thou  hast  had  thy  time  ;  and 
a  better  time  awaiteth  thee  yet,  when  my  throne  of  righteous- 
ness shall  be  established ;  but  for  the  present,  be  thou  con- 
tent to  take  thyself  out  of  the  way,  that  the  grace  of  my 
Father,  through  me,  may  shine  forth  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  And  now,  ye  swift  messengers,  ye  gentle  ministers 
of  grace,  go  forth  and  preach  the  good  tidings  of  great  joy 
unto  all  men  ;  preach  the  gospel  of  salvation  unto  every 
creature  under  heaven.  This  message  hath  been  proclaimed 
unto  the  earth  since  the  resurrection ;  that  men  are  no 
longer  under  the  law,  that  God  is  gracious,  that  their  sins 
are  forgiven,  and  that  God  is  love.     This  is  the  grace,  this 


2  22       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

is  the  peace,  which  unto  men,  unto  all  men,  is  proclaimed  ; 
and  the  world  is  under  the  law  no  longer,  but  under  grace. 
And  thus,  by  one  man  the  law  hath  been  satisfied,  and 
by  one  man  the  grace  of  God  hath  been  revealed  from 
behind  the  eclipse  which  the  law  had  brought  upon  it.  For 
it  was  but  an  eclipse,  because  the  promise  was  before  the 
law,  and  the  law,  which  came  four  hundred  and  thirty  years 
after,  could  not  make  the  promise  of  none  effect. 

The  promise  was  of  grace,  and  not  of  merit  ;  of  faith,  and 
not  of  works.  Abraham  believed,  and  it  was  counted  unto 
him  for  righteousness.  Abraham  lived  under  a  dispensation 
under  which  sin  was  not  imputed.  "  For,"  saith  the  apostle; 
"  sin  is  not  imputed,  where  there  is  no  law ;"  and  he  quoteth, 
as  applicable  to  that  period,  these  words  of  the  psalmist, — 
"  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is 
covered  :  blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not 
iniquity."  If,  then,  Abraham  and  his  seed  until  the  law 
came  were  free  from  the  imputation  of  sin,  by  virtue  of  the 
promise  of  Christ,  surely  much  more  are  we  free  who  live 
under  the  gospel  of  Christ.  I  say,  much  more,  not  in  respect 
of  the  degree  of  freedom,  but  in  respect  of  the  clearness  with 
which  it  is  revealed.  For,  in  respect  to  the  substance  of  the 
thing,  that  we  have  the  same  with  Abraham,  he  the  same 
with  us,  is  clear,  not  only  from  the  general  reasonings  of 
Paul,  in  the  Romans  and  in  the  Galatians,  but  by  two  ex- 
press declarations  of  the  New  Testament  to  that  effect.  The 
first  in  the  prophecy  of  Zacharias,  at  the  circumcision  of  his 
son  the  Baptist,  wherein,  speaking  of  Jesus,  (Luke  i.  ^2^  he 
states,  as  the  end  of  his  mission,  "  to  perform  the  mercy  pro- 
mised to  our  fathers,  and  to  remember  His  holy  covenant,  the 
oath  which  He  sware  to  our  father  Abraham."  Now  that 
which  is  remembered  hath  had  a  previous  existence  ;  and 
that  which  is  performed  under  a  covevant  hath  been  pre- 
viously promised,  in  the  giving  of  the  covenant  of  promise. 
The  other  passage  is  still  more  explicit,  (Gal.  i.  13,) — "  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us  ;  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that 
hangeth  on  a  tree  ;  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might 
come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  might 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  IV.  223 

receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through  faith."  And  thus 
we  conclude,  that  from  Abraham  until  now,  the  dispensa- 
tion of  grace  and  imputed  righteousness,  the  dispensation 
which  hath  no  law,  and  imputeth  no  sin,  hath  been  in  the 
world  ;  that  when  given  unto  Abraham,  it  was  given  unto 
him  for  all  nations ;  according  as  it  is  written  in  the  same 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  (chap.  iii.  7,) — "  The  Scripture,  fore- 
seeing that  God  would  justify  the  nations  through  faith, 
preached  before  the  gospel  unto  Abraham,  saying.  In  thee 
shall  all  nations  be  blessed."  The  law  did  not  annul  that 
dispensation  of  grace,  but  was  a  safeguard  unto  it ;  to  pre- 
serve the  hope,  and  to  define  the  object  of  it,  and  to  drive 
men  from  self-righteousness  into  the  arms  of  merciful  grace : 
unto  which  end  the  law  serveth  still,  as  we  have  shewn 
above,  or  else  it  will  drive  men  into  destruction,  and  leave 
them  under  despair.  In  this  sense,  indeed,  Christ  hath  the 
whips  and  scourges  of  the  law,  and  shall  use  them  too, 
against  the  day  of  judgment,  which  is  the  law's  triumphal 
and  eternal  glory.  But  as  to  Moses,  he  is  defunct ;  and 
let  him  rest  in  his  grave.  The  Son  of  man  is  Lord 
also  of  the  law,  which  is  with  Him  in  better  keeping 
than  ever  it  was  with  Moses  ;  for  He  shall  make  it  tri- 
umphant in  the  age  to  come,  when  Moses  on  the  one  hand, 
and  Elias  on  the  other,  shall  bear  up  the  glory  of  the  trans- 
figured world.  But,  meanwhile,  the  law  being  lifted  up  from 
present  time,  and  transported  unto  another  age,  we  have  now 
the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  proclaimed  by  the  Church 
unto  the  wide  world.  The  world  is  under  grace,  and  is  no 
longer  under  law.  For,  as  old  Luther  hath  bravely  spoken 
it,  "  Wherefore  if  sin  afflict  thee,  and  death  terrify  thee,  think 
that  it  is,  as  indeed  it  is,  but  an  imagination,  and  a  false 
illusion  of  the  devil  ;  for  in  very  deed,  there  is  now  no  sin,  no 
curse,  no  death,  no  devil  to  hurt  us  any  more,  for  Christ  van- 
quished and  abolished  all  these  things." 

I  said  above,  that  the  law  is  fraught  with  so  much  wisdom 
and  righteousness  as  to  become  an  object  of  adoration  to  the 
good  feeling  of  the  natural  man.  But  when  it  thus  bristleth 
with  threatenings  and  terrors  against  infirm  humanity,  and 
will  not  intermarry  with  grace  or  mercy,  it  doth  alienate  the 


224       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  METHOD  : 

affections  of  the  natural  man,  and  become  to  him  the  occa- 
sion of  fear  and  dread.  Being  taken  out  of  the  way  therefore 
as  an  offence,  a  deadly  offence,  to  humanity's  infirm  condi- 
tion, the  question  ariseth,  And  what  how  is  there  left  for  man 
to  pay  his  reverence  and  worship  unto  ?  Taking  away  this 
fine  ideal  of  everything  righteous,  good,  and  perfect,  what 
have  you  to  put  in  its  stead  ?  Man  cannot  be  without  a 
model  according  to  which  to  shape  himself,  and  in  which  to 
behold  that  excellence  to  which  he  would  attain,  and  do 
homage.  Brethren,  this  is  a  question  into  the  resolution  of 
which  I  shall  enter  a  little ;  and,  at  one  and  the  same  time, 
spite  those  adorers  of  Moses,  and  confound  those  idle  and 
wicked  dreamers  about  Christ's  immortal  body,  while  I  in- 
struct you  more  perfectly  in  the  method  of  this  great  salva- 
tion. 

The  object,  then,  which  now  standeth  unto  our  admiration 
and  homage,  instead  of  the  law,  is  the  person  of  Christ ;  who, 
while  He  is  holy  as  the  law,  is  tender  and  pitiful  as  a  brother, 
and  endued  with  the  almightiness  of  God  ;  who  is  so  far 
from  irritating  the  weakness  and  overwhelming  the  remorse 
and  compunction  of  sinful  flesh,  so  far  from  threatening  its 
every  backsliding  and  transgression  with  death,  that  He  hath 
Himself  become  touched  with  the  fellow-feeling  of  our  infir- 
mities, being  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  hath  carried 
our  diseases,  and  borne  our  sicknesses,  and  is  the  grace  of 
that  God  of  whom  the  law  is  the  holiness.  The  person  of 
Christ  Jesus,  therefore,  by  right  taketh,  as  by  nature  He 
attracteth,  the  admiration,  affection,  and  homage  of  sinful 
flesh.  He  taketh  us  by  right  of  being  the  living  law,  holy  as 
it  is,  perfect  as  it  is,  admirable  as  it  is.  He  attracteth  us  by 
being  a  person,  a  living,  moving,  breathing  person  ;  bone  of 
our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  He  hath  purchased  us, 
moreover,  by  redeeming  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  and 
pouring  into  the  wounded  conscience  the  oil  of  joy;  and, 
finally.  He  demandeth  us  as  very  God,  as  the  very  grace  of 
God,  who  in  Himself  concentrateth  all  grace,  and  unto  whom 
God  giveth  the  singular  and  sole  glory  of  His  grace.  Com- 
pared with  this  person,  thus  accomplished,  with  God's  grace 
and  man's  infirmity,  thus  recommended  by  the  achievement 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  225 

of  holiness,  in  union  with  most  perfect  grace  and  compas- 
sion, object  of  fearless  love,  object  of  doubtless  trust;  who 
that  hath  a  heart  to  feel,  or  a  mind  to  understand,  will  ever 
speak  again  in  praise,  will  ever  revert  again  in  confidence,  to 
that  awful  iron-hearted  law,  which  neither  knows  pity  for  the 
fallen,  nor  shews  compassion  for  the  penitent  ?  Yet  true  it  is, 
and  of  verity,  that,  like  the  Galatians  of  old,  .we  who  have 
received  the  Spirit,  by  the  hearing  of  faith,  would  go  back  to 
be  perfected  by  the  law.  We  would  believe  in  Christ,  we 
would  possess  the  Spirit,  and,  so  qualified,  pay  our  homage  to 
the  law,  which  maketh  void  the  work  of  Christ,  and  proveth 
that  we  have  never  known  the  Spirit.  Perverseness  this,  de- 
basement this,  which  the  Church  would  not  have  come  to, 
had  she,  unto  her  faith  of  the  Lord's  atonement,  added  the 
lively  faith  of  His  true  sympathising  humanity,  of  His  merci- 
ful and  faithful  high  priesthood  in  the  heavens :  and  from 
which  base  pandering  to  the  law,  and  preferring  of  Moses 
above  Christ,  nothing  will  ever  deliver  the  Church,  but  the 
revival  and  frequent  reiteration  of  that  great  truth,  which 
Satan  is  attempting  to  bring  into  question, — that  Christ  was 
in  very  deed  consubstantial  with  the  fallen  creature,  and  hath 
taken  up  with  Him  into  the  heavens  the  ever-present  con- 
sciousness and  sympathy  of  the  conditions  and  trials  of  His 
members  upon  the  earth.  The  Church  hath  been  so  spoiled 
in  its  tenderer  and  nobler  parts,  by  the  continual  and  exclu- 
sive doctrine  of  debt  and  payment,  of  barter  and  exchange  ; 
of  suffering  for  suffering,  of  clearing  the  account  and  setting 
things  straight  with  God  ;  that  she  hath  lost  the  relish  for  dis- 
course of  the  brotherly  covenant,  of  the  spousal  relation,  of 
the  consubstantial  union  betwixt  her  and  the  Lord  Jesus.  She 
hath  lost  relish  for  high  discourse  concerning  the  mystery  of 
His  person,  as  God-man ;  the  beauty,  the  grace,  the  excel- 
lency of  that  constitution  of  being  which  He  possessed.  Strong 
as  the  strongest,  even  of  almighty  strength ;  weak  as  the 
weakest, — of  all  infirmities  conscious  ;  holy  as  the  holiest,  the 
only  holy  thing,  yet  consubstantial  with  the  sinful  creatures, 
sinful  in  His  substance  as  they,  tempted  as  they,  liable  to  fall 
as  they.  The  Church  likewise,  by  this  profit-and-loss  theo- 
logy, by  this  divinity  of  the  exchange,  hath  come  to  lose  the 
VOL.  V.  P 


2  26       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

relish  of  that  most  noble  discourse,  which  treateth  of  the 
grandeur  and  the  glory  of  the  risen  Christ  wielding  the  sceptre 
of  the  heavens,  yet,  from  His  peerless  height  of  place,  consent- 
ing to  cast  His  eye  perpetually  upon  the  poorest,  the  meanest, 
the  most  deeply  tried  and  overwhelmed  of  all  His  people. 

And  now  that  the  Lord  has  stirred  up  my  mind,  and  the 
minds  of  some  others  of  His  servants,  to  awaken  and  arouse 
the  Church  to  thoughts,  to  loves,  to  hopes  of  a  higher  mood, 
the  servants  of  the  wicked  one  would  come  in,  and  fix  her  for 
ever  at  the  level  of  these  low  waters,  by  daring  to  assert  that 
Jesus  our  Lord  had  no  such  sympathies  with  the  fallen  crea- 
tures, and  that  the  Church  may  not  aspire  to  such  close, 
spousal,  sisterly  thoughts  of  Him.  For  if,  as  they  dream,  and 
dare  to  put  forth,  Christ  was  other  than  a  fallen  man,  and 
never  knew  the  fellowship  of  our  temptations,  from  the  flesh, 
from  the  world,  from  Satan,  how  can  human  nature,  in  its  fallen 
state,  go  out  with  confidence  and  affection,  and  without  fear,  to 
repose  herself  upon  His  intercession  and  mediation  ?  You  say. 
He  hath  borne  her  sin,  and  therefore  made  her  unspeakably 
His  debtor  :  you  say,  our  sins  were  imputed  to  Him,  and  He 
bore  them  ;  He  pitied  us  so  much  as  to  bear  them  ;  and 
therefore  we  ought  to  have  confidence  in  Him.  Nay,  but, 
thou  half  reasoner,  art  thou  so  ignorant  of  human  nature  as 
not  to  know  that  the  debt  of  obligation  is  not  favourable  to 
the  growth  of  love  .-*  It  is  love  which  begetteth  love,  and 
love  annihilates  all  distance  by  condescension,  and  love  rais- 
eth  through  all  distance  the  poor  one  who  hath  thus  been 
condescended  to  in  love.  Knowest  thou  not,  O  man,  that  a 
king,  who  keeps  his  state  and  distance  as  a  king,  yet  by  his 
almoner  sendeth  gifts  to  the  most  distressed  and  needy  of  his 
people,  doth  not  expect  that  they  should  thereupon  cast 
themselves  into  his  bosom,  or  take  liberties  with  his  royal 
state  .''  They  are  beholden  to  him,  and  they  shew  it  in  the 
reverent  distance  and  lowly  humility  which  they  bear  before 
him.  And  if,  as  thou  sayest,  the  Son  of  God,  in  doing  us 
this  bounty,  did  yet  keep  the  distance  and  the  dignity  of  an 
unfallen  creature,  avoiding  by  an  inestimable  distance  our 
devil-haunted  and  sin-defiled  region,  flitting  amongst  us  like 
a  shadow,  but  not  inhabiting  our  tenement  at  all  ;  amongst 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  227 

us,  but  not  one  of  us  ;  then  I  say,  that  His  bounty  conferred, 
the  very  magnitude,  the  very  value  of  it,  will  only  put  another 
impediment  and  obstruction  in  the  way  of  that  brotherhood,  of 
those  espousals,  of  that  fellow-feeling,  trust,  and  confidence, 
which  the  soul  ought  to  have  towards  Him  for  whom  she  is 
called  to  give  up  her  own  high  and  noble  thoughts  concern- 
ing this  fair  proportioned  and  authoritative  law  of  God. 
The  soul,  instead  of  coming  into  melting  tenderness  towards 
such  a  one,  will  be  appalled  far  away  from  His  inscrutable 
holiness,  and  will  feel  it  to  be  her  duty  to  worship  Him  at  a 
distance,  and  to  acknowledge  Him  with  fear  and  trembling. 
Ah,  no  :  ye  half  rcasoners,  ye  are  not  yet  so  wise  as  God, 
whose  method  of  wooing  a  fallen  creature  is  far  more  ex- 
quisite and  far  more  effectual  than  yours.  You  come  roughly 
on,  loading  her  whose  affections  you  would  gain  with  gifts, 
but  all  the  while  keeping  in  her  presence  a  state  whereat  she 
trembleth  ;  more  after  the  manner  of  an  eastern  prince  pur- 
chasing a  fair  slave,  than  the  manner  by  which  the  human 
soul  is  won.  But  God  sent  His  Son  to  make  acquaintance 
with  human  kind,  upon  the  lowly  level  of  their  condition  ;  as 
if  that  eastern  prince  should  lay  aside  his  crown  and  sceptre, 
and  dress  himself  in  humble  guise,  and  be  a  servant  to  gain 
the  humble  maiden  whose  hand  he  desireth.  So  God  wisely 
purposed  ;  and  so  Christ  wisely,  graciously,  nobly,  divinely 
performed;  speaking  of  no  benefit,  though  He  had  given  us  all  ; 
keeping  no  state,  though  He  was  the  Lord  of  creation.  In 
the  lowly  level  of  fallen  humanity.  He  wooed  His  bride,  and 
thus  He  won  her'love.  By  the  very  act,  and  in  the  very  act 
of  His  humiliation  unto  her  estate,  He  took  away  the  fear  of 
distance  and  the  sense  of  obligation.  But  still  the  load  would 
be  too  great  for  love  to  grow  under,  exalted  as  He  is  now, 
Potentate  of  potentates,  were  it  not  for  the  same  faculty  and 
power  of  condescension  which  abideth  in  Him  still.  He  is 
removed  away  from  us,  but  not  by  being  above  the  care 
of  us.  Only  to  lift  His  handmaiden  unto  the  same  dignity 
hath  He  gone  to  claim  His  birthright  crown,  that  He  may 
raise  her  to  the  fellowship  of  the  same ;  and  meanwhile 
the  Spirit  is  His  Messenger,  the  Spirit  is  the  comforter 
of  His  spouse,  who  cometh  not,  in  the  form  of  infinite  God- 


2  28       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD : 

head,  to  overwhelm  and  consume  the  faculties  of  the  crea- 
ture whom  He  would  possess  ;  nor  yet,  in  the  form  of  perfect 
and  unfallen  manhood,  to  rebuke  the  fallen  creature's  weak 
and  sinful  condition,  but  in  the  form  of  risen,  redeemed  man- 
hood— manhood  that  once  was  fallen,  but  now  is  risen  and 
redeemed. 

It  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  of  the  risen  Christ,  which  we 
receive.  Not  until  He  ascended  up  on  high,  did  Christ  receive 
the  Spirit  to  bestow  it  upon  His  Church.  It  is,  therefore,  the 
Spirit  of  the  risen  Christ,  the  triumphant  Christ,  Christ  the 
vanquisher  of  sin  and  death,  which  we  receive ; — a  distinct 
person  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  condescending  from  the  abso- 
luteness of  His  Divinity,  to  carry  on  the  communication  be- 
tween Christ  and  His  people  ;  a  communication  not  made  by 
words  merely,  but  by  regeneration  and  the  quickening  of  a 
new  life,  in  all  things  consentaneous  unto,  and  defined  by, 
and  identical  with,  the  life  of  Christ.  As  my  natural  life  is 
instinct  with  all  Adam's  fallen  propensities,  so  is  my  renewed 
life  instinct  with  all  Christ's  risen  glories.  With  the  commu- 
nication of  life,  therefore,  kindred  life,  unto  His  own  warm, 
congenial  life ;  with  the  inspiration  of  all  divine,  pure,  and 
holy  affection,  with  a  new  heart,  with  a  right  mind  ;  with 
power  from  on  high,  power  which  sweetly  and  gently  conde- 
scendeth  to  all  our  weaknesses  and  infirmities,  in  order  to 
strengthen  them,  and  make  us  more  than  conquerors  over  all 
our  enemies ;  with  gentle  love,  which  whispereth  peace  unto 
our  troubled  souls,  and  biddeth  its  waves  to  be  still ;  with 
wisdom  from  above,  which  counselleth  our  ignorance  and  our 
folly,  and  represseth  all  our  wayward  violence  ;  with  good 
government  and  righteous  lordship,  which  doth  reprove,  re- 
buke, restrain,  chastise,  and  restore  us  to  the  paths  of  right- 
eousness ; — with  these,  the  forms  of  redeemed  manhood ;  with 
these,  the  tender  respects  unto  our  frailty,  and  healing  treat- 
ment of  our  diseases,  and  restoration  of  our  health,  and  re- 
newal of  our  being  after  the  image  of  God,  in  righteousness 
and  true  holiness,  doth  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  come  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  risen  God-man,  to 
cherish,  to  revive,  to  comfort,  and  to  establish  the  peace,  joy, 
and  blessedness  of  His  spouse  upon  the  earth,  and  to  carry 


/;  V  RE  MO  VA  L  OF  THE  LAW.  229 

on  that  excellent  work  of  gaining  her  love,  that  He  may 
teach  her  to  be  obedient  and  dutiful  unto  the  will  of  His 
Father.  We  say  that  Christ — first  in  fallen  yet  sinless  man- 
hood, and  next,  in  fallen  manhood  redeemed  and  risen — doth 
indeed  accomplish  a  perfect  work  of  winning  the  heart,  taking 
the  admiration,  possessing  the  confidence,  and  occupying  all 
the  soul,  of  those  whom  the  Father  hath  given  to  Him  for  an 
inheritance;  those  whom  He  purchased  unto  Himself  for  an 
inheritance,  those  whom  the  Spirit  cleanseth  and  clotheth,  to 
be  unto  Him  for  a  chaste  and  holy  spouse.  Sublime  mystery 
of  love  !  O  love  most  excellent,  love  most  glorious  !  Blessed 
indeed  are  the  people  who  are  thus  beloved.  My  soul,  rejoice 
in  God  thy  Saviour.  All  that  is  within  me  bless  His  holy 
name,  and  forget  not  all  His  benefits,  who  forgiveth  all  thine 
iniquities,  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases,  who  redeemeth  thy 
life  from  destruction,  who  crowncth  thee  with  loving  kind- 
ness and  tender  mercies,  who  satisfieth  thy  mouth  with  good 
things,  so  that  thy  youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagle's. 

Now,  brethren,  this  is  the  object,  even  this  man  Jesus 
Christ,  which  I  have  to  set  before  you,  over  and  against  that 
law  which  our  natural  man  reverenceth  so  much.  —  Is  the 
law  holy }  Christ  is  also  holy,  who  hath  kept  the  law  and 
made  it  honourable.  Is  the  law  venerable  in  its  antiquity } 
more  venerable  is  He  who  was  in  the  beginning  with  God, 
who  was  God.  Is  the  law  good,  discerning  between  the 
good  and  the  evil,  and  judging  righteously,  defending  the 
oppressed,  upholding  the  weak  }  so  good  is  Christ,  who  shall 
bring  every  hidden  work  of  darkness  unto  light ;  who  shall 
judge  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  discern  between 
the  just  and  the  unjust,  in  that  day,  in  that  age,  in  which  He 
will  set  judgment  upon  the  earth,  and  establish  righteousness 
among  the  nations.  What  is  there  in  the  law  holy,  and  just, 
and  good,  which  is  not  in  Jesus,  the  Holy,  the  Just,  and  the 
Good  }  And  for  the  curse  of  the  law,  you  have  the  blessing 
of  the  promise  in  Christ ;  and  for  the  certain  condemnation 
of  the  law,  you  have  the  certain  justification  and  salvation 
of  Christ.  In  the  law  there  is  righteousness,  but  there  is  no 
mercy :  in  Christ  mercy  and  truth  are  met  together,  right- 
eousness and  peace  have  kissed  each  other.     In  the  law  there 


2 30       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

is  no  help :  but  in  Christ  there  is  the  help  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
In  the  law  there  is  no  life,  but  chill  cold  death  :  in  Christ 
there  is  life,  more  abundant  life,  everlasting  life.  In  the  law, 
God's  holiness  in  terrible  thunderings,  and  lightnings,  and 
darkness,  and  a  fearful  voice  is  set  forth ;  and  who  can  abide 
it .''  which,  when  the  children  of  Israel  heard,  they  prayed 
that  it  might  not  be  spoken  unto  them  any  more :  but  in 
Christ  you  have  righteousness  presented  in  grace ;  the  grace 
of  God  shining  forth  in  the  person  of  the  Holy  One  and  the 
Just.  In  the  law  you  have  manhood  racked,  tortured,  and 
slain :  in  Christ  you  have  the  same  fallen  manhood  sancti- 
fied, beautified,  glorified,  blessed  for  ever.  And  what  more 
shall  I  say,  than  that  the  law  is  the  direful  expression  of 
that  everlasting  contradiction  which  there  is  between  God  and 
a  fallen  creature,  the  impassable  gulf  which  had  never  been 
passed,  and  seemed  impassable  until  Christ  came  forth,  made 
of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  who  is  the  expression  of 
God's  grace,  God's  pity,  and  God's  compassion  towards  the 
fallen  creature,  of  God's  purpose  to  redeem  it,  and  to  set  His 
glory  and  His  strength  in  it,  for  ever  and  for  ever. 

Who,  then,  that  understandeth  these  things,  will  prefer  the 
iron-hearted  law  to  the  human-hearted  Christ ;  will  set  up 
justification  by  works,  in  the  stead  of  justification  by  faith ; 
will  prefer  to  live  under  the  law,  rather  than  to  live  under 
grace  ?  But  I  say  unto  you,  brethren,  that  if  ye,  having 
believed  in  Christ,  and  received  the  Spirit,  will  yet  make  the 
law  your  measure  and  your  master,  ye  do  dishonour  unto 
these  Divine  Persons ;  ye  do  bring  Christ  back  from  the  right 
hand  of  the  glory,  to  travail  in  flesh  again.  And,  instead  of 
prospering  in  holiness  by  such  an  unworthy  preposterous 
course,  you  will  fall  away  into  legality  and  formality,  and  live 
in  fear  and  trembling.  If  Christ  had  intended  His  people  to 
be  under  the  law,  as  He  was  Himself,  then  would  He  have 
bestowed  upon  them  the  Holy  Spirit  before  He  ascended  up 
on  high ;  the  Holy  Spirit  would  have  proceeded  from  the 
body  of  His  humiliation,  and  not  from  the  body  of  His  glory. 
But  it  is  expressly  said,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet 
given,  because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified.  Besides,  if  we 
had  to  keep  the  law  over  again,  there  would  be  no  vicari- 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  231 

ousncss  in  the  work  of  Christ.  Imputation  and  atonement 
would  be  empty  words,  if  so  were  that  the  law  had  a  de- 
mand upon  us  still,  and  that  we  were,  either  now  to  be  under 
its  authority,  or  hereafter  judged  by  its  statutes.  Christ  hath 
died  in  vain,  if  we  be  still  under  the  law ;  or,  as  Paul  saitli, 
"  If  we  be  under  the  law,  we  are  fallen  from  grace."  Surely, 
if  the  first  Adam  begetteth  in  his  likeness,  the  Second  Adam 
begetteth  in  His  likeness  also  :  and  what  is  that  likeness  } 
The  likeness  not  now  of  sinful  flesh,  but  of  glorious  flesh ; 
the  image  of  God,  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  which 
Christ  was  not  in  His  veiled  flesh,  but  which  He  is  in  His 
transcendent  glory :  and  this  is  distinctly  and  unequivocally 
declared,  in  that  passage  of  Scripture  where  it  is  written,  that 
"  we  are  renewed  after  the  image  of  God,  in  righteousness 
and  true  holiness." 

When,  therefore,  any  legalist  will  prove  to  me,  that  Christ 
the  Father  of  the  regeneration  is  under  the  law,  I  will  be- 
lieve that  the  children  of  the  regeneration  are  under  the  law; 
but  not  till  then  :  and  I  think  it  will  puzzle  them  to  prove 
that  the  Lord  of  all  is  not  Lord  of  the  Ten  Commandments 
also.  And  yet  I  know  that  there  are  men  so  ignorant  and 
foolish  as  to  maintain  this  also,  who  go  about  to  say,  and  to 
affirm,  that  the  law  of  the  Ten  Commandments  is  the  epitome, 
so  to  speak,  of  the  Divine  will,  and  that  God  himself  is  under 
the  obligations  of  law  ;  or,  as  they  are  pleased  to  say,  that  a 
thing  is  not  right  because  it  is  the  will  of  God,  but  it  is  the  will 
of  God  because  it  is  right.  Base  theologians,  and  poor  philo- 
sophers !  would  you  dethrone  God  also  from  His  sovereignty, 
and  bring  Him  under  the  fate,  Xhefatiun,  of  the  ancients  } 
Is  the  Word  before  God ;  or  doth  the  Word  proceed  from 
God  .''  Doth  not  the  Father  generate  the  Word  }  Is  not  the 
Father  alone  self-originated  '^  I  cannot  enough  wonder  that 
men  should  so  exaggerate  as  to  put  the  Moral  Law  into  any 
connexion  with  God  otherwise  than  as  the  Giver  of  it.  The 
object  of  it  is  not  God  ;  the  object  of  it  is  not  even  unfallen 
man  ;  nor  hath  it  anything  to  do  with  the  regenerated  man. 
The  only  object  of  it  is  the  fallen  man  ;  and  I  say  again,  what 
I  have  often  said,  it  is  the  perfection  of  the  fallen  manhood, 
and  it  is  no  more.     And  if,  as  I  believe  in  the  age  to  come. 


2  32       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD : 

men,  flesh-and-blood  men,  shall  be  constituted  under  this 
law,  and  by  the  ejection  of  Satan  out  of  flesh,  and  out 
of  the  world  holding  of  flesh,  and  through  the  righteous 
government  of  Christ  instead  thereof,  shall  be  enabled  to 
keep  the  law  ; — if  the  law,  as  I  believe,  shall  then  become 
the  statute  law  of  the  world,  still  it  will  only  be  a  form  of 
fallen  humanity  ;  the  best  form  which  it  can  attain  unto,  but 
yet  not  the  redeemed,  or  rather  the  regenerated  form.  For 
still,  men  will  be  fallible,  and  this  estate  of  humanity  will  end 
in  an  apostasy ;  so  that,  from  the  beginning  unto  the  ending 
of  it,  the  law  of  the  two  stone  tables  hath  nothing  to  do  with 
the  work  of  the  Spirit,  hath  no  authority  over  the  renewed  man, 
who  is  wholly  devoted  unto  Christ,  and  acknowledgeth  none 
but  He  ;  and  is  renewed  in  the  likeness  of  the  risen  Christ,  or 
after  the  image  of  the  risen  God,  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness. 

Now,  it  may  seem  to  many  a  very  idle,  and  to  others 
it  may  seem  a  very  dangerous  thing,  thus  to  assert  the 
believer's  independence  of  any  law  ; — the  former  saying, 
Why  take  away  any  safeguard  from  morality  }  the  latter 
saying.  You  teach  licentiousness ; — to  whom  I  answer.  It  is 
want  of  faith  in  you  both.  The  subject  which  I  handle  is 
the  most  momentous,  and  lies  at  the  root  of  all  holiness. 
Doth  it  serve,  O  ye  objectors,  the  interests  of  holiness,  or  doth 
it  disserve  them,  to  break  the  law,  and  to  dishonour  the 
law .''  And  do  ye  not  daily  break  it,  in  thought,  word,  and 
deed  }  And  if  ye  be  under  it,  is  it  not  violated  and  dishonoured 
by  you  ?  and  where,  then,  is  the  holiness  of  God  .■'  Can  a  man, 
who  is  familiar  with  the  everyday  breaking  of  the  law,  have 
either  it  or  the  Lawgiver  long  in  reverence  ?  And  if  Christ 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  are  to  come  in  and  patch  up  the  matter, 
what  a  system  have  we  here,  but  grace  fighting  with  debt, 
and  mercy  fighting  with  justice  ;  or  rather  grace  and  mercy 
becoming  the  great  indulgence  of  unholiness  .''  I  speak  not  of 
the  dishonour  of  Christ  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  such  a 
scheme, — I  speak  of  the  dishonour  of  the  law  itself.  O  ye 
gainsayers  of  the  truth,  ye  dishonour  the  law,  and  the  Law- 
giver; but  we  honour  the  law,  we  magnify  the  law  and 
make  it  honourable.     We  say  it  standeth  the  awful  and  un- 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  IV.  233 

stained  monument  of  God's  holiness,  condemning  us,  and 
condemning  all.  We  live  not  by  it ;  we  die  before  it :  we 
live  only  by  grace ;  we  live  only  by  pardon,  and  from  the  time 
forth  of  receiving  our  pardon.  We  do  not  go  and  commit 
the  same  ofifences  over  again,  which  we  must  needs  do,  if  we 
were  under  that  law  of  subjection  ;  but  we  receive  the  Spirit 
of  adoption  from  the  Father,  and  from  the  rank  of  His  sub- 
jects we  are  admitted  unto  the  honour  of  His  family:  from 
the  rank  of  rebels  we  pass  into  the  freedom  of  sons ;  and  as 
sons  we  receive  the  Spirit  of  our  Father,  and  through  the 
Spirit  do  live  unto  the  praise  and  the  glory  of  Him  who  hath 
redeemed,  and  recovered,  and  regenerated  us.  Now  be  ye 
judges,  whether  one  possessed  of  the  Spirit,  and  under  the 
power  of  love,  is  more  in  a  condition  to  sanctify  the  living 
God,  than  one  who  is  under  the  law,  and  without  the  Spirit. 
But,  moreover,  if  it  be  true  that  a  man  who  will  live  under 
the  law  cannot  have  the  Spirit,  what  a  predicament  it  places 
you  legalists  in !  And  this  now  is  what  Paul  expressly  de- 
clareth  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  (chap.  iii.  2-5) :  "  This 
only  would  I  learn  of  you.  Received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the 
works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith .-'  Are  ye  so 
foolish,  having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect 
by  the  flesh  ?  Have  ye  suffered  so  many  things  in  vain,  if  it 
be  yet  in  vain  ?  He  therefore  that  ministereth  to  you  the 
Spirit,  and  worketh  miracles  among  you,  doeth  he  it  by  the 
works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  }" 

The  only  escape  which  it  is  possible  to  make  from  the 
cogency  of  this  argument,  which  we  have  held  upon  the 
removal  of  the  law,  is  by  this  question  :  But  if  the  law  be 
removed,  what  model  or  ensample  have  we  by  which  to  walk  ? 
I  answer.  The  model  and  example  of  Christ.  But  they 
reply,  Was  not  Christ  under  the  law  ;  and  how  can  He  be 
a  model  to  those  that  arc  not  under  the  law  .''  To  this 
question  I  will  reply  by  explaining  a  little  further  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  And  this  will 
have  the  advantage  of  still  further  exposing  the  vile  heresy 
of  the  immortal  and  incorruptible  body  of  Christ.  For  if 
Christ's  human  nature  were  not  in  like  wise  constituted,  as 
ours  is,  then,  in  addition  to  all  the  results  above  mentioned, 


2  34       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD  : 

there  must  come  this  also,  that  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
should  not  be  understood,  and  should  become  of  secondary, 
instead  of  being  of  primary  importance,  in  the  belief  of  every 
Christian.  And  I  must  confess,  that  the  narrow  apprehen- 
sion of  the  atonement  which  prevaileth,  and  the  reducing  of 
the  mystery  to  mere  imputation,  and  I  would  say,  moreover, 
the  mean  and  meagre  views  of  imputation  itself,  have  brought 
to  pass  a  very  insufficient  doctrine  on  the  subject  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  work  to  be  accomplished  must  always  be  the 
measure  of  the  power  necessary  to  accomplish  it ;  and  from 
believing  that  the  work  to  be  accomplished  by  Christ  is 
merely  the  bearing  of  so  much  inflicted  wrath,  vengeance, 
and  punishment,  it  cometh  naturally  to  pass  that  the  need 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  towards  the  accomplishment  of  His  work 
is  not  perceived.  The  union  of  the  Divine  and  human  nature 
in  itself  sufficeth ; — the  human  nature  to  suffer  the  mighty 
load,  the  Divine  nature  to  sustain  the  Sufferer.  And  besides 
these,  what  need  of  a  third  principle,  and  that  a  person,  and 
a  Divine  person  also .-'  Accordingly,  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
work  of  Christ  is  almost  or  altogether  avoided  ;  which,  how- 
ever, is  in  several  parts  of  the  Acts,  and  in  the  9th  chapter 
of  the  Hebrews,  expressly  declared  to  have  been  the  power 
in  which  He  performed  His  mighty  works,  and  offered  His 
blameless  sacrifice.  This,  now,  is  made  much  worse  by  those 
who  suppose  He  had  not  such  a  human  nature  in  all  respects 
as  we  fallen  men  have.  For  to  the  difficulty,  just  mentioned, 
is  added  this  other :  how  suffering  could  in  any  wise  reach 
Him.  If  so  be  He  was  not  fallen,  or  in  any  middle  condition 
between  the  fallen  and  the  unfallen,  what  meaning,  or  pur- 
pose, or  use  there  could  be  for  the  Holy  Ghost  unto  the  per- 
son composed  of  the  eternal  Son  and  a  faultless  creature,  I 
cannot  for  a  moment  imagine.  And  the  fact  is  positive  and 
undeniable,  that  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  person  of 
Christ,  though  formerly  a  commonplace  in  divinity,  and 
standing  topic  of  discourse,  is  no  longer  either  the  one  or  the 
other  ;  and  being  so,  I  will  prophesy  that  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  must  in  such  a  case  become  a  very  confused  and 
idle  theory  ;  for  whatever  is  not  seen  realised  in  the  person  of 
Christ,  ceaseth  from  being  a  theological  reality,  and  hasten- 


BY  REMOVAL  OF  THE  LA  W.  235 

eth  to  become  a  confused  hypothesis.  And  I  have  sonie 
h-ope  that  this  argument  which  I  have  been  long  waging  may 
haply  be  profitable  to  enlighten  the  mind  of  the  Church  upon 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  also. 

But  to  come  to  the  question  of  our  model  and  example : 
The  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  human  nature  of  Christ, 
Irom  His  conception  unto  His  baptism,  was  to  fulfil  all  the 
righteousness  of  the  law;  and  I  think  that  word  which  He 
spake  at  His  baptism,  "  Thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  right- 
eousness," is  the  amen  with  which  He  concluded  that  great 
accomplishment.  The  baptism  of  John  was  the  isthmus  which 
connected  the  fulfilment  of  the  law  upon  the  one  hand,  with 
the  opening  of  the  spiritual  and  evangelical  holiness  upon 
the  other  :  to  which  our  Lord  alludes,  in  these  words  :  "  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence  from  the  baptism  of 
John  until  now,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force  ;"  giving 
them  to  understand  that  the  baptism  of  John  had  initiated 
into  the  kingdom,  as  the  baptism  of  Moses  in  the  cloud,  and 
in  the  sea,  initiated  into  the  law.  From  the  anointing  with 
the  Dove,  I  believe  that  our  Lord  entered  upon  a  higher  and 
holier  walk  than  mere  law-fulfilling,  giving  to  us  the  ensample 
of  that  spiritual  holiness  which  knoweth  no  law  but  the  law 
of  liberty ;  that  is,  the  will  inclined  unto  the  will  of  God. 
Therefore  it  was  that  our  Lord  broke  the  Sabbath  without 
offence  ;  and  touched  lepers,  and  otherwise  offended  the  law  ; 
and  therefore,  also.  He  went  up  to  the  feasts,  or  went  not  up, 
according  to  His  mind.  And  many  things  besides  He  did, 
which  are  all  expressed  in  these  two  similitudes,  of  which, 
when  challenged  for  this  neglect,  He  made  use :  "  No  man 
putteth  new  wine  into  old  bottles ;  no  man  putteth  a  piece  of 
new  cloth  into  an  old  garment;"  signifying  that  the  spirit  of  His 
discipleship,  of  which  He  was  then  performing  the  novitiate, 
would  not  piece  on  to,  much  less  be  contained  within,  the  old 
worn-out  commandments  of  Moses.  Besides,  the  works  which 
He  did  by  the  Spirit  were  the  self-same  works  which  the 
Spirit  in  the  apostles  did :  and  it  is  continually  written,  He 
set  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps.  Now,  it 
is  my  conviction,  from  these  and  many  other  grounds  which  I 
cannot  now  enter  upon,  that  our  Lord  enjoyed,  during  His 


236        THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD. 

public  ministry,  that  measure  of  the  Spirit  which  His  Church 
was  to  be  endowed  with  after  the  resurrection,  to  the  end 
that  His  hfe  might  be  the  model  of  every  Christian's  life  who 
is  regenerated  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  walked  in  liberty, 
He  rejoiced  in  power,  He  triumphed  in  victory  from  the  time 
He  received  the  Spirit  after  His  baptism,  until  the  time  He 
fell,  as  it  were,  plumb  down  from  that  elevation  into  the 
agony  of  the  garden  and  the  abandonment  of  the  cross.  Be- 
fore entering  upon  which.  He  was  strengthened  with  that 
voice  out  of  the  heavens,  "  I  have  both  glorified  my  name, 
and  I  will  glorify  it  again."  Then  came  on  that  hour  and 
power  of  darkness  of  which  He  said  Himself,  "  Now  is  my 
soul  troubled,  and  what  shall  I  say .''  Father,  save  me  from 
this  hour }  but  for  this  cause  came  I  to  this  hour :  Father, 
glorify  thy  name.  Then  came  there  a  voice  from  heaven, 
saying,  I  have  both  glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again." 
This,  I  think,  brought  on  the  great  crisis,  and  put  Him  upon 
His  probation  to  the  very  uttermost.  And  now  openeth  that 
scene  of  agony,  that  ocean  of  sorrow,  concerning  which  it  is 
not  our  present  purpose  to  discourse,  save  to  mark  it  as  a 
grand  epoch  in  the  Redeemer's  life.  It  is  my  conviction  that 
our  Lord's  life  between  these  two  points  of  time,  the  de- 
scending of  the  Dove,  and  the  bringing  of  the  Greeks  unto 
Him,  when  that  fearful  hour  began,  is  truly  the  great  realisation 
and  prototype  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  every  regenerate  man, 
in  order  that  his  life  might  not  only  fulfil  the  law  of  Moses, 
but  give  the  prototype  and  the  example  of  all  spiritual  right- 
eousness. The  Father,  when  His  Son  had  accomplished  and 
fulfilled  the  law,  did  bestow  upon  Him  a  measure  of  that  resur- 
rection-life in  the  Spirit  which  He  himself  should  afterwards 
be  honoured  and  privileged  to  bestow  upon  the  Church.  The 
Father  baptized  Him  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  was  after- 
wards to  baptize  all  the  elect  children ;  and  so  He  became  an 
example  unto  us,  and  must  have  tasted  a  great  enjoyment  of 
His  Father's  countenance,  far  above  and  beyond  what  He 
enjoyed  before,  and  in  the  removal  of  which  I  deem  the  misery 
of  that  agony  and  death  to  have  chiefly  consisted.  He  had 
the  Spirit  lifting  Him  into  a  high  communion  with  His  Father^ 
to  the  end  of  shewing  Him  the  regenerate  Church,  and  what 


S/N  OF  THE   WORLD.  237 

should  be  the  measure  of  their  enjoyment  ;  and  this  being 
accomplished,  I  say  again,  He  was  let  plumb  down  into  the 
former  measure  of  the  Spirit,  to  swim  in  the  tempestuous 
ocean,  which  all  the  elements  of  moral  disorder  could  raise 
around  Him.  Fearful  chaos !  awful  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death  !  season  of  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness ! — Thus 
have  we  two  measures  of  the  Spirit  :  the  first  for  law-keeping, 
to  be  in  lieu  of  the  obedience  of  those  elect  ones  before,  who 
had  beheved  on  Him  under  the  law,  or,  as  it  is  written,  "for 
the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  covenant ;"  the 
second  measure  of  the  Spirit  being  for  an  ensample  unto  us 
of  that  baptism  of  the  Dove  with  which  we  should  be  baptized. 
And  there  is  a  third  measure  of  the  Spirit,  which  quickened 
Him  in  the  tomb,  with  which  also  our  bodies  shall  be  anointed 
when  we  shall  be  quickened  in  the  tomb. — And  thus  have  we 
the  whole  mystery  of  the  Holy  Ghost  realised  in  the  life  of 
Christ.  First,  the  mystery  of  law-keeping,  done  for  the  sake 
of  those  that  were  under  the  law,  but  not  for  us  ;  secondly, 
the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  the  Church  now  en- 
joyeth;  and  thirdly,  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
shall  constitute  the  New  Jerusalem  of  the  risen  saints  in  the 
millennial  kingdom.  And  thus  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
substantiated  and  realised  in  the  person  of  Christ ;  is  a  fact, 
is  a  thing  upon  which  faith  may  be  rested  by  every  poor 
creature  of  whose  substance  Christ  hath  taken  a  part.  And 
thus  is  answered  the  only  question  which  remained  against 
the  removal  of  the  law:  What  model  remaineth  to  us  in  its 
stead  .''  Christ's  life  from  His  baptism  to  His  agony  is  our 
model  of  the  liberty  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  let 
this  sufiice  for  the  subject  of  the  removal  of  the  law. 


CONCLUSIONS. 

It  may  be  asked,  after  this  discourse  concerning  the  method 
of  the  Incarnation,  And  what  serveth  it  that  Christ  should 
thus  have  reconciled  all  flesh  unto  God,  and  taken  away  the 
middle  wall  of  partition  which  was  between  Jew  and  Gentile, 
and  preached  peace  unto  them  which  were  near,  and  to  them 


238        THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD. 

which  were  afar  off,  seeing  that  it  is  only  to  a  chosen  and 
elect  portion  of  the  fallen  creatures  that  salvation  and  blessed- 
ness, and  glory,  do  eventually  come  ?  Is  there  not  in  this 
method  something  which  is  inconsistent  with  itself,  which 
either  makes  Christ  over-generous  to  cast  away  His  bounty, 
or  the  Father  over-stinted  to  restrain  His  Spirit  ?  Hath 
not  some  part  of  the  work  of  Christ  been  wrought  to  no 
effect  ?  or  hath  not  a  promise  and  hope  been  held  out  unto 
men,  larger  than  the  Father  purposed  to  fulfil  ? — Not  so, 
by  any  means.  The  purpose  of  the  Father  is  the  purpose 
of  the  Godhead  :  the  work  of  Christ  is  the  will  of  the  Father, 
shewing  forth  that  purpose  of  the  Godhead  ;  and  so  also  is 
the  work  of  the  Spirit.  Though  wrought  in  different  persons, 
it  is  by  the  same  one  absolute  will,  by  the  same  one  substance 
of  God  wrought.  To  eJcplain  this  matter,  I  shall  now  address 
myself  in  a  few  words. 

I.  The  purpose  of  God  in  creating  man,  was  the  manifest- 
ation and  communication  of  His  own  glory  unto  the  crea- 
tures which  He  had  made,  or  which  He  was  about  to  make  ; 
and  to  bring  the  creature  wholly  to  depend  upon  Him,  and 
to  worship  Him.  As  He  was  to  make  it  out  of  nothing.  He 
would  have  it  remember  its  nothingness  in  itself,  and  to  ac- 
knowledge the  will,  the  absolute  will,  from  which  it  derived 
its  form  and  blessedness  ;  to  this  single  end  of  bringing  the 
creature  to  apprehend  the  nothingness  of  its  substance,  and 
the  absoluteness  of  its  dependence  upon  the  Divine  will, 
which  is  the  very  truth.  This,  I  say,  is  the  great  object 
which  God  hath  in  view,  and  the  great  consummation  unto 
which  He  will  attain,  by  His  dealings  with  the  creatures. 
To  this  end,  a  fall  was  ordained,  that  the  creatures  might 
know  their  own  insufficiency,  their  own  emptiness.  Then 
came  the  law,  which  as  a  schoolmaster  did  instruct  the 
creature  in  its  sinfulness,  did  bring  into  vision,  and  openly 
shew  how  far  it  came  short  of  its  own  perfection.  The  law 
added  no  iniquity  to  the  creature  ;  but  it  brought  all  its  ini- 
quity clearly  to  view.  As  there  be  certain  chemical  solutions, 
with  which,  if  you  anoint  the  skins  of  ancient  parchments 
whereon  no  letter  now  appeareth,  straightway  the  letters,  and 
words,  and  sentences  come  up  again  from  the  erasure  of  time, 


S/N  OF  THE    WORLD.  239 

and  the  oblivion  of  ages  ;  even  so  the  law,  operating  upon 
the  fleshly  being  of  man,  did  bring  to  view  volumes  of  sins 
which  were  not  known  to  be  there,  and  did  load  the  con- 
science with  a  weight  of  dead  works,  and  shew  in  the  heart 
an  ever-open  fountain  of  wickedness  from  which  men  needed 
to  be  purged  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  ere  ever  they  could  be 
in  fit  trim  to  serve  the  living  God.  By  the  law,  therefore, 
human  nature  was  shewn  to  be  exceeding  sinful.  The  hate- 
fulness  of  the  creature  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God  was  estab- 
lished :  the  obstinacy  of  sin,  its  remediless  poison  in  the  flesh, 
the  creature's  total  helplessness  in  itself,  the  creature's  total 
alienation  from  God,  were  excellently  displayed ;  but  the 
law  was  only  an  unfulfilled  prophecy,  a  despised  statute,  an 
abortive  thing,  producing  no  life,  but  death,  until  Christ 
came.  It  was  a  definition  of  what  man  in  the  fallen  state 
should  be,  and  would  be,  yet  which  none  of  the  myriads  that 
had  been  was,  until  Christ  came  and  perfectly  fulfilled  it. 
Christ  therefore  is  the  rebuke  of  men ;  Christ  is  the  measure 
of  human  delinquency ;  Christ  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just, 
sheweth  the  unholiness  and  unrighteousness  of  all  besides 
Himself. — Now  behold  extremes  meet.  In  Him,  in  whom 
mercy  and  truth  have  met  together,  righteousness  and  peace 
have  kissed  each  other,  the  Godhead,  taking  experience 
of  the  fallen  manhood  by  junction  and  personal  union 
therewith,  doth,  after  seeing,  feeling,  having  its  infirmi- 
ties, freely,  fully,  for  ever  discharge  them,  cancel  its  sins, 
and  bear  away  its  transgressions.  The  law,  therefore,  ends 
in  the  removal  of  law.  The  imputation  of  sins  ends  in  the 
forgiveness  of  sins ;  and  unto  the  creature  grace  is  preached, 
peace  is  preached,  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  are  proclaimed, 
which  I  do  now  again  proclaim  unto  every  one  who  hears 
me,  saying.  Your  sins  are  remitted,  your  peace  is  made :  be- 
lieve, be  ye  saved.  Go  home,  and  tell  it  to  your  children  ; 
gather  your  kinsfolk,  and  tell  it  unto  them :  tell  it  in  your 
villages  and  towns ;  pass  the  seas,  and  tell  it  unto  the  nations. 
Let  the  wide  world  know  it,  and  the  races  of  men  believe  it, 
that  their  sins  are  forgiven,  their  peace  made,  God  gracious, 
abundant  in  mercy  and  truth. 

This  is  the  gospel  which  hath  now  for  eighteen  hundred 


240       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD. 

years,  yea,  from  the  beginning,  been  proclaimed  unto  the 
earth.  The  creature  hath  known  the  grace  of  God  to  it, 
whose  power  and  severity  it  knew  heretofore  in  the  law. 
And  yet,  behold,  how  fruitless  and  unefficacious  it  hath  been  ! 
Who  hath  believed  the  report  ?  Their  sound  hath  gone  into 
all  the  earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  world's  end  ;  but  unto 
whom  have  they  been  welcome,  and  by  whom  have  they 
been  prized .-'  All  the  Lord  required  of  those  that  believe  in 
the  glad  tidings  was,  that  they  should  be  baptized  ;  and  this 
not  for  the  end  of  binding  them  over  to  be  His  serfs,  or 
bondsmen,  but  to  bring  them  to  be  His  sons.  All  he  be- 
sought was,  that  they  might  receive  His  Son,  laden  with 
unspeakable  gifts  ;  and  by  their  baptism  signify  the  same,  to 
the  end  they  might  receive  power  from  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
become  the  sons  of  God.  No  bloody  circumcision,  no  pains 
and  penalties  of  the  law,  no  burden  of  ceremonies,  no  national 
peculiarities,  no  local  restrictions ;  liberty,  love,  peace,  joy, 
hope,  holiness,  and  whatever  else  most  excellent  the  soul 
desireth,  whatever  else  most  noble  the  soul  aspireth  to,  this 
were  they  entreated,  sued  to  receive  by  baptism.  This  single 
act,  acknowledging  God  for  the  good  gift  of  Christ,  and  hop- 
ing for  the  higher  gift  of  the  life  of  Christ  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
men  being  entreated  unto  by  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  by 
the  labours  of  the  Church,  have  obstinately  rejected  for  these 
eighteen  hundred  years.  They  have  slain  the  bearers  of  the 
good  tidings ;  they  have  persecuted  the  believers  in  the  good 
tidings ;  they  have  rejected  the  grace  of  God  ;  they  have 
crucified  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  Him  to  an  open 
shame  ;  they  have  trampled  under  foot  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  with  which  they  should  have  been  sanctified,  and 
counted  it  an  unholy  thing. 

Tell  me  now,  brethren,  if  hereby  the  sinfulness  of  the  fallen 
creature  hath  not  been  awfully  illustrated,  beyond  measure 
augmented,  magnified,  until  it  is  become  almost  unpardon- 
able. What  a  thing,  what  an  unheard-of  thing,  that  the 
great  God  should  thus  condescend  unto  His  creatures  in  love 
immense,  and  His  creatures  reject  His  unspeakable  gift ! 
The  world  is  drenched  in  guilt ;  the  red  waters  of  its  guilt 
flow  up  unto  the  very  lip,  and  in  a  few,  few  instants  shall 


SIN  OF  THE   WORLD.  241 

ovenvhelm  its  life.  In  blood,  in  a  deluge  of  blood,  its  height 
of  hope  shall  be  drowned,  its  star  of  hope  quenched :  the 
day  is  far  spent,  the  night  is  at  hand.  The  night  cometh, 
and  likewise  the  morning.  If  the  law  did  bring  out  the 
letters  of  guilt  which  had  sunk  beneath  the  surface,  and 
escaped  the  knowledge  of  mankind,  then  the  gospel  hath 
made  these  letters  to  burn  like  fire,  which  shall  consume  to 
the  lowest  hell ;  to  flame  like  the  bale-light  which,  flaming 
from  afar,  betokens  woe  and  misery  to  the  land.  Oh  the 
guilt,  oh  the  misery  of  the  nations  which  have  rejected  the 
gospel !  Truly,  very  truly,  is  it  written,  "  This  is  the  con- 
demnation, that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  but  men  loved 
darkness  rather  than  light,  their  deeds  being  evil."  Ay,  ay, 
this  indeed  is  the  condemnation,  that  we  sin  against  the 
Father  and  the  Son ;  the  gracious  Father,  the  crucified  and 
risen  Son.  This  is  the  world's  doom,  that  she  hath  refused, 
rejected,  and  sinned  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  testifying  in 
Jesus,  and  in  the  Church.  It  is  not  a  vain  thing,  therefore, 
that  Christ  hath  tasted  death  for  every  man ;  it  is  a  part  of 
God's  great  scheme,  consistent  therewith,  yea,  the  crowning 
thereof,  to  shew  forth  the  sinfulness  of  the  creature  in  all 
possible  advantages  in  which  it  could  be  placed, — to  prove 
that  when  it  was  created  good,  it  would  not  obey  the  slightest 
command ;  that  when  it  fell,  it  would  not  receive  the  com- 
pletest  redemption,  the  largest  grace.  Inveterate  purpose  of 
sinning !  Not  a  habit,  but  a  law ;  not  an  accident,  but  an 
essence ;  the  very  being,  the  very  essence,  the  unalterable 
law  of  the  creature,  proving  that  as  it  came  out  of  nothing, 
it  hath  nothing,  it  can  do  nothing,  it  is  void  and  empty ;  and 
therefore  if  it  should  ever  be  brought  to  something,  it  must 
be  brought  thither  and  maintained  there  by  the  eternal  and 
all-sufficient  power  of  God.  And  thus  is  the  great  truth  in 
the  way  of  being  proved,  that  the  creature  came  out  of  abso- 
lute nothingness ;  is  absolutely  nothing  in  itself,  and  hath  its 
being,  hath  its  something,  whatever  it  be,  only  from  the  all- 
sustaining  and  absolute  will  of  God.  But  this  is  not  all : 
there  is  yet  a  deeper  view  of  the  question  which  we  now  go 
to  inquire  into. 

2.  Besides  this  object,  which  the  Creator  had  in  His  mind, 
VOL.  V.  Q 


242       THE  INCARNA  TION—ITS  ME THOD. 

of  making  the  insufficiency  and  inability  of  the  creature  to 
appear,  there  is  another,  which  is,  to  make  His  own  power 
to  appear;  His  own  power  and  goodness  in  delivering  the 
creature  from  its  own  nothingness  and  sinfulness,  into  the 
estate  of  regeneration,  power,  and  glory,  where  it  may  know, 
feel,  and  possess  some  portion  of  His  own  blessedness.  And 
to  this  part  of  the  purpose  the  former  is  but  subservient. 
Historically,  monumentally,  and  eternally  to  establish  the 
nothingness  and  vileness  of  the  creature,  by  its  successive 
plunges  out  of  light  into  darkness,  until  it  reach  the  very 
base  of  being  in  the  second  death,  is  only  to  the  end  of 
shewing,  by  the  negative,  more  effectually  this  affirmative. 
That  the  power,  and  efficiency,  and  glory,  and  blessedness 
unto  which  He  should  bring  the  creature,  are  not  due  unto 
itself,  but  due  only  unto  Him  the  Creator.  Therefore  parallel 
and  alongside  with,  yea,  and  in  the  very  midst  of  this  great 
historical  demonstration  of  the  creature's  sinfulness  and 
weakness,  we  have  continually  proceeding  a  demonstra- 
tion of  the  Creator's  power,  to  transcend  all  these  base 
propensities,  and  to  surmount  all  these  difficulties,  insuper- 
able save  to  Himself,  and  to  make,  out  of  such  emptiness,  ful- 
ness to  come  forth  ;  out  of  such  wickedness,  holiness ;  out  of 
such  enmity,  love ;  out  of  such  frailty,  infallible  strength. 
This  is  the  demonstration  of  electing  love,  and  constitutes 
election  as  indispensable  a  part  of  the  great  mystery  of  God 
as  is  the  sinfulness  of  the  creature.  These  elect  persons,  in 
whom  God  prevaileth  against  the  natural  man's  obstinate 
aversions,  constitute  the  Church  ;  and  their  souls  are  now 
gathering  unto  Christ,  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  is  above. 
These  being  upon  the  earth,  are  a  distinct  and  separate 
people  from  the  rest ;  having  in  them,  and  upon  them,  a  pur- 
pose of  God,  which  the  others  have  neither  in  them  nor  upon 
them.  They  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  They  were  the  Father's  wit- 
nesses unto  a  coming  Christ,  until  He  came  :  and  now  they 
are  the  Father's  witnesses  of  a  living  Christ,  of  a  risen  Christ, 
of  a  reigning  Christ,  of  a  Christ  yet  about  to  come.  Demon- 
strations are  they  of  the  Trinity,  of  the  Father's  will  above 
the  creature's  will,  of  the  Son's  revival  and  resurrection  of  the 


S/N  OF  THE  CHURCH.  243 

creature  by  personal  union  thereunto  ;  of  the  Holy  Ghost's 
ability  to  do  this  work  of  revival  and  regeneration  in  other 
creatures  besides  Christ.  Thus  are  they  not  mere  word-of- 
mouth  witnesses,  but  witnesses  in  life,  living  witnesses,  wit- 
nesses by  their  being,  of  that  great  truth  that  God  is  three  per- 
sons in  one  substance.  Now,  that  this  election  might  be  known 
unto  men,  as  a  great  original  principle  of  the  purpose  of  God, 
it  is  not  merely  written  in  a  book,  as  our  word-idolaters  teach  ; 
but  it  is  embodied  in  a  living,  moving,  continued  chain  of 
persons,  who,  beginning  from  the  Fall,  shall  preserve  onward 
the  continuity  of  the  election,  until  they  stand  in  immutable 
and  infallible  glory,  to  be  used  by  the  Creator  in  the  effecting 
of  His  still  unaccomplished  purpose,  whatever  it  may  be. 
This  co-fraternity  of  elected  ones,  this  communion  of  saints, 
took  an  outward  symbol,  received  an  outward  symbol  and 
definition,  in  the  person  of  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God  ;  from 
which  time  until  this  present,  they  have  continued  defined 
and  separated  by  an  outward  symbol,  first  of  circumcision, 
and  then  of  baptism,  unto  this  day.  Unto  this  end  therefore, 
I  say,  the  Church  is  embodied,  even  unto  the  end  of  enjoying 
all  the  blessedness  of  God's  electing  love,  and  testifying,  in 
the  midst  of  the  world,  unto  that  goodness  and  power  of  God 
which  riseth  strong  and  sublime  above  all  let  and  hindrance, 
and  accomplisheth  God-like  purposes  and  God-like  acts,  by 
means  of  the  empty  nothingness  of  creature-substance,  by 
means  of  the  violent  aversions,  and  ungodly  propensities,  and 
Antichristian  determinations  of  creature-substance.  Now,  as 
God's  purpose  is  essentially  one  and  indivisible,  like  Himself, 
though  for  the  convenience  of  discourse  we  must  handle  it 
under  several  parts,  this  power  of  election  is  given,  not  here 
and  there,  but  everywhere,  in  the  midst  and  in  the  duration 
of  the  creature's  being  :  and,  in  like  manner,  the  down-draw- 
ing powers  of  the  creature  are  proved  not  here  and  there, 
but  everywhere  in  the  midst  and  in  the  duration  of  the 
creature.  Therefore  it  is  necessary  to  the  unity  of  the 
Divine  purpose,  and  to  the  demonstration  of  its  pervading 
omnipresence,  that  the  election  should  be  gathered  out  of 
all  kindreds,  and  nations,  and  tongues,  and  peoples ;  and 
moreover,  it  is  in  like  manner  necessary,  that  in  the  election 


244       'THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD. 

itself  there  should  be  an  invisibility,  an  impenetrable  secrecy, 
a  hiddenness,  beyond  the  research,  and  utterly  defying  the 
discovery,  of  man,  to  the  end  it  may  not  be  possible  to  de- 
scribe a  bound  or  limit,  whether  physical  or  metaphysical, 
within  which  the  election  is  contained.  For  if  that  bound 
could  be  described,  then  most  clear  and  manifest  it  is,  that 
the  rest  would  be  excluded  ;  and  so  God's  upholding  and 
sustaining  power  would  only  be  proved  over  a  part  of  His 
handiwork,  and  not  over  the  whole.  But,  by  means  of  the 
invisibility,  that  which  is  only  a  part  hath  yet  given  to  it  the 
faculty  of  proving,  for  the  whole,  the  mighty  power  of  God  to 
sustain  and  uphold  the  creature,  so  that  no  creature,  defined 
by  any  conditions  whatever,  should  be  able  to  say,  "  God  can- 
not uphold  me  :  I  am  beyond  the  province  of  electing  power. 
My  wickedness,  my  infirmity,  is  greater  than  God  can  over- 
come/' 

To  prevent  such  a  fell  conclusion,  it  is  that  the  election  or 
true  Church  is  essentially  invisible,  and  must  continue  so 
until  the  time  be  arrived  for  some  great  manifestation  and 
demonstration  of  the  Divine  power,  after  another  kind  and 
manner  than  that  of  election.  Now,  if  the  election  must  be 
invisible,  God,  when  He  gives  to  it  a  symbol,  such  as  circum- 
cision and  baptism,  must  necessarily  admit  within  the  pale 
thereof,  reprobate  as  well  as  elect  ones  ;  for  if  only  elect  ones 
were  admitted  within  the  pale,  then  they  would  at  once  be- 
come visible,  have  a  definite  place,  a  definite  number,  a  defi- 
nite form  ;  and  so  exclude  all  beyond  that  place,  number,  and 
form,  from  the  action  of  God's  power  and  love.  It  is  to  this 
intermingling  of  the  election  and  reprobation  in  the  Church,  I 
Avould  call  your  attention,  as  being  the  second  great  method 
by  which  God  unfolds  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  and 
which  makes  the  sin  of  the  Church  of  a  deeper  dye  than  the 
sin  of  the  outward  world  ;  for  I  do  believe  that  to  this  end 
the  Church  was  made  visible,  and  all  the  evils  of  a  visible 
Church  permitted,  in  order  that  men  might  be  proved  capable 
of  sinning  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  of  sinning  against 
the  Son.  The  Church,  by  which  I  mean  the  glorified  Head 
and  the  members,  invisible  as  well  as  visible, — the  Church  is 
the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  the  Church  is  a  greater  mys- 


S/iV  OF  THE  CHURCH.  245 

tery  of  God's  power  than  the  incarnation.  The  incarnation 
shewed  the  power  of  God  in  flesh,  when  personally  united 
unto  the  Son.  The  Church  sheweth  the  power  of  God  in 
flesh,  not  personally  united  unto  His  Son,  but  only  mystically 
united  with  Him.  The  flesh  in  Christ  never  sinned,  though 
ever  passive  and  pervious  unto  temptation  of  all  kinds ;  but 
our  flesh  ever  sinneth,  and  is  burdened  with  an  incredible 
amount  of  sinfulness,  of  actual  sinfulness  ;  habits  innumer- 
able, hardness  impenetrable,  enmity  insurmountable  is  there 
in  every  man,  at  the  time  at  which  electing  love  begins  to  ex- 
hibit an  irresistible  almighty  power  against  all  these  enor- 
mities and  excesses  of  the  sinful  creature.  Wherefore,  I 
say  again,  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Church  is  a  mightier 
work  than  in  the  incarnation  of  Christ.  The  former  is  the 
forthshewing  of  God's  good  pleasure  in  His  Son  ;  the  latter 
was  the  forthshewing  of  His  anger  against  His  Son.  The 
former  is  the  putting  forth  of  the  power  of  the  Son  in 
His  immortal  body;  the  latter  was  the  putting  forth  of 
His  power  in  a  mortal  body.  The  former  is  that  mighty 
working  of  the  Spirit  which  He  wrought  in  Christ  when  He 
raised  Him  from  the  dead ;  the  latter  was  the  working  of  the 
same  Spirit,  when  He  created  a  holy  thing  out  of  an  unholy, 
and  supported  a  holy  thing  against  unholy  conditions.  In 
one  word,  the  Church  is  the  demonstration  of  the  Father's 
electing  love,  of  Christ's  mighty  power  to  do  God's  will, 
God's  work,  God's  pleasure  by  the  vile  impotent  creature. 
The  incarnation  is  only  God's  power  to  destroy  the  enmity 
between  Himself  and  the  creature,  and  put  the  creature  upon 
the  footing  of  grace,  favour,  forgiveness  of  sin  ;  to  cast  Satan 
out  of  it ;  to  withhold  sin  from  mastering  it :  and  to  reveal 
Christ  the  Lord  of  it,  the  Redeemer  of  it,  the  Defender  gf  it  : 
and  to  place  it  through  Christ,  in  the  equipoise  of  its  own 
inclination  ;  and  so  to  shew  forth  the  native  abhorrence  and 
disinclination  which  it  hath  to  God,  even  when  He  is  mani- 
fested as  a  Father,  as  a  forgiving,  gracious  Father.  But  the 
Church  riseth  much  higher  than  this  equipoise,  and  hath  the 
counterpoise  of  God's  almighty  power  and  efiicacy  to  do  in  it, 
and  for  it,  the  mighty  works  of  His  good  pleasure.  Being  so, 
therefore,  that  the  Church  is  this  fuller  vessel  of  God's  power, 


246       THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD. 

even  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all ;  the  fruit  of  the 
Father's  love,  the  power  of  the  Son's  endless  life,  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost :  whoso  sinneth  against  the  Church  doth  sin 
a  greater  sin  than  doth  he  that  sinneth  against  the  preached 
gospel  only.  This  is  a  point  which  many  of  my  dear 
brethren  cannot  understand  ;  but  which,  by  the  blessing  of 
God,  I  hope  this  discourse  may  convince  them  of  I  mean 
those  beloved  brethren  who  see  the  freeness  of  the  gospel, 
and  the  guilt  incurred  by  rejecting  it :  but  who  see  not  the 
fulness  of  the  Church,  and  the  guilt  of  sinning  against  its 
holy  ordinances.  Such  brethren  are  fit  for  missionaries ;  but 
they  have  to  learn  the  higher  profession  of  a  minister  of  the 
Church,  of  the  established  ministers  of  a  Christian  state,  and 
a  baptized  people.  They  preach  not  up  to  the  measure  of 
the  people's  privileges  as  an  election ;  they  preach  not  down 
to  the  depths  of  the  people's  sinfulness,  as  sinning  against  the 
peculiar  life,  love,  and  holiness  of  the  election.  They  see  the 
sin  against  the  Son  of  man,  but  the  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost  they  see  not,  they  weigh  not,  they  reprove  not :  yet  is 
it  this,  and  nothing  else,  which  the  apostle  alludeth  to  in  the 
6th  and  the  lOth  chapters  of  the  Hebrews,  and  which  Peter 
alludeth  to  in  the  2d  chapter  of  his  Second  Epistle.  But 
why  refer  to  passages  in  Scripture,  when  all  Scripture  and  all 
providence  beareth  out  the  greater  guilt  and  heavier  judg- 
ments of  a  people  in  covenant .''  This  is  what  makes  the  sin 
of  Babylon  so  much  more  awful  than  the  sin  of  the  world  ; 
so  that  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  feel  the  anguish  of 
the  burning  lake,  one  thousand  years  before  the  rest  of 
the  world, — yea,  one  thousand  years  before  the  devil  him- 
self. The  Jews  sinned  not  this  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  because  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  and 
therefore  by  stripes  can  their  sin  be  remitted.  The  un- 
baptized  world,  that  rejected  Christ,  shall  in  a  deluge  of 
blood  be  drenched,  and  come  out  from  her  fearful  bap- 
tism more  beautiful  than  ever;  but  the  Church,  the  adul- 
terous Popery,  and  the  gainsaying  infidel  Protestantism,  all 
who  have  rebelled  against  the  baptized  Church,  and  refused 
the  Spirit-filled  ordinances,  go  down  quick  into  the  pit,  and 
welter  in  the  lake  of  fire  which  shall  never  be  quenched, 


ELECTION  NO  HINDRANCE.  247 

during  the  season  that  Satan  abideth  in  the  bottomless  pit, 
during  the  season  that  the  nations  which  are  saved  walk  in 
the  light,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  bring  their  glory  and 
honour  into  the  gates  of  the  resurrection  city.  But,  woe  is 
me !  who  perceiveth  this  the  greater  wickedness  of  the 
Church  ?  who  warneth  her  of  this  her  heavier  doom  ?  Are 
we  ministers  then  ?  No,  the  servant  of  a  house  understand- 
eth  the  laws  of  that  house,  and  in  his  service  observeth  them 
and  setteth  them  forth  ;  but  the  ministers  of  the  Church  know 
not  the  difference  between  the  world  and  the  Church  ;  and 
how  then  can  they  set  it  forth  ?  This  is  what  I  mean,  when 
I  preach  so  much  of  baptism ;  when  I  preach  so  much  of  the 
apostasy ;  and  I  give  God  thanks  that  you,  at  least,  have 
attained  unto  the  understanding  thereof;  and  I  pray  you  to 
be  diligent  in  the  meditation  of  this  our  greater  responsibility, 
and  to  entreat  the  Church,  and  by  all  means  set  ourselves,  to 
contend  against  the  ignorance  of  this  our  heavier  account, 
which  pertaineth  to  us  as  a  Church. 

Now,  by  permitting  this  reprobation  in  the  midst  of  the 
election,  sin  is  shewn  to  be  of  a  deeper  dye  than  by  any 
other  means  it  could  have  been  proved  to  be.  The  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost  is  established,  the  sin,  not  only 
against  the  incarnate,  but  against  the  risen  Christ ;  the  sin 
against  the  Father's  love,  and  the  Father's  strength  ;  that  sin 
passing  forgiveness,  that  sin  passing  remission ;  whose  deep- 
est, blackest,  vilest  spot  the  blood  of  Christ  cannot  cleanse ; 
whose  weight  and  misery  of  eternal  woe  the  goodness  of 
God  will  not  through  eternity  remove.  What  an  awful 
thought !  so  awful  is  the  sin,  the  hideous,  enormous  sin, 
under  which  Christendom  now  groans ;  with  the  wrath  of 
which  the  heaven  is  now  frowning,  for  the  beginning  of  the 
judgment  of  which  the  dark  portentous  clouds  are  gathering, 
whose  presence  I  feel  in  the  obstinacy  and  infidelity  of  the 
times ;  and  oh,  let  me  speak  the  truth, — whose  influences  I 
feel  every  day  in  my  own  wicked  heart !  God  deliver  me,  God 
deliver  my  people,  whom  He  hath  instructed  me  to  warn. 
God  bring  out  an  election  from  the  midst  of  us,  and  in  us 
shew  the  pillars  and  foundation,  which  nothing  can  shake, 
and  which  nothing  can  remove.     With  this  prayer,  with  this 


248        THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD. 

earnest  prayer  for  you  all,  I  dismiss  this  second  head  of  con- 
clusions— namely,  the  greater  sinfulness  which  is  shewn  forth 
by  a  constituted  Church,  over  and  above  that  which  is  shewn 
forth  by  an  evangelised  but  unbaptized  world. 

3.  But  I  cannot  conclude  such  a  weighty  discourse  with- 
out a  word  of  opening  into  every  soul,  touching  the  freeness 
of  their  door  of  entrance  into  the  election.  That  the  gift  is 
to  be  communicated  to  a  part  only  of  the  human  race  is  evi- 
dent, as  well  from  the  fact  as  from  the  language  of  Scripture, 
and  the  continual  doctrine  of  the  Church  ;  Universalism  hav- 
ing always  been  regarded  as  a  most  damnable  heresy.  Now, 
this  limitation  doth  not  stand  in  the  thing  itself  which 
Christ  did  :  Christ's  work  is  as  capable  of  being  applied  to 
the  whole  as  to  a  part :  and  in  fact,  so  far  as  title  of  Lord- 
ship is  concerned,  it  doth  apply  unto  the  whole.  In  Christ 
all  shall  be  made  alive  ;  by  Christ  all  shall  be  judged,  and 
this  because  He  is  the  Son  of  man ;  but  in  Christ  all  shall 
not  be  saved,  but  only  a  chosen  portion.  Now,  the  thing 
which  men  search  into  is.  What  is  the  cause,  and  what  gives 
the  limitation  unto  the  saved  portion  }  And  the  answer  is  in 
Christ's  own  words  frequently  repeated  :  "  All  that  the  Father 
giveth  me,  shall  come  to  me  ;  and  him  that  cometh  to  me,  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out,"  (John  vi.  37.)  And  again,  verse  39  : 
"  This  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which 
he  hath  given  me,  I  should  lose  nothing,  but  should  raise  it 
up  again  at  the  last  day."  And  again,  verse  44 :  "  No  man 
can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw 
him,  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  And  again, 
verse  45 :  "  Every  man  therefore,  that  hath  heard  and  hath 
learned  of  the  Father,  cometh  unto  me."  It  is  a  thing,  there- 
fore, at  no  rate  to  be  doubted,  but  unto  the  death  to  be  main- 
tained, that  the  Father  hath  reserved  in  His  own  personal 
propriety,  the  measure  and  extent  unto  which  He  will  make 
that  redemption  to  go,  which  Christ  hath  wrought  out  equally 
and  alike  for  the  whole  created  substance  ;  whereby  Christ's 
work  is  put  under  subjection  to  the  Father's  will,  which  may 
extend  the  benefits  of  it  to  whom  He  pleaseth,  to  all,  if  so 
He  had  pleased.  The  election  of  the  Father,  therefore,  taketh 
place  in  Jesus  Christ ;  that  is  to  say,  not  one  could  have  been 


ELECTION  NO  HINDRANCE.  249 

elected,  but  in  virtue  of  the  redemption  of  Christ  for  sin,  both 
appointed,  and,  as  we  say,  contracted  for  by  covenant.  Yet 
at  the  same  time,  while  the  Father  doth  thus  preserve  and 
glorify  His  own  holiness,  and  shew  forth  all  righteousness  as 
in  His  Son  contained,  and  from  His  Son  proceeding,  and  so 
constitutes  Him  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and  the  Lord  of 
all  ;  He  doth  reserve  unto  His  own  unrevealed  will  the  ex- 
tension of  that  righteousness  which  in  Christ  is  stored  up, 
unto  as  many  as  He  pleaseth,  unto  no  one  if  He  pleaseth. 
The  glory  of  His  creative  and  redemptive  power  would  have 
been  shewn  forth  in  the  act  of  redeeming  that  portion  of  the 
created  substance  which  Christ  had  assumed  into  His  own 
personality  ;  but  the  glory  of  His  grace  would  not  thus  have 
been  manifested,  if,  without  applying  the  benefit  unto  another 
creature.  He  had  merely  lifted  up  Christ,  and  in  Him  reigned 
and  ruled  over  all.  To  shew  forth  His  grace,  therefore,  in 
great  magnificence,  He,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of 
His  will,  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace,  according  to 
His  good  pleasure  which  He  hath  purposed  in  Himself,  (Eph. 
i.,)  did  graciously  resolve  to  apply  the  benefits  of  Christ's 
death  unto  a  chosen  portion  of  the  human  race.  But  reserv- 
ing, in  the  mystery  of  His  own  unrevealed  and  incomprehen- 
sible essence,  the  number  and  the  individual  persons  of  the 
elect.  He  instituted  the  ministry  of  reconciliation  which  we 
fill,  and  commanded  it  to  be  preached  unto  every  creature : 
"That  God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself, 
not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them.  And  now  we 
are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  you 
by  us  ;  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to 
God."  But  while  we  preach  reconciliation  accomplished  be- 
tween God  and  a  wicked  world,  and  shew  forth  the  wonders 
of  God's  love  and  mercy  in  the  humiliation  of  His  Son  ;  we 
preach  this,  not  as  the  complete  message  of  God,  which  is 
able  to  perfect  the  salvation  of  a  sinner,  because  we  declare, 
at  the  same  time,  that  no  one  can  come  unto  Christ,  except 
the  Father  which  hath  sent  Christ  draw  him.  We  preach 
the  reconciliation  in  Christ,  as  mankind's  free  passage  and 
safe  conduct  unto  the  Father.  We  preach  Christ's  reconcilia- 
tion as  the  removal  of  all  lets  and  hindrances  which  stood 


2  50       THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD. 

between  God  and  man,  in  consequence  of  sin.  And  so  we 
bring  the  guilty  conscience  to  be  disburdened  of  its  guilt,  and 
the  countenance  of  God  to  be  cleared  from  its  clouds  and 
wrathful  frowns.  To  the  sinner  Christ  bringeth  peace  ;  God 
He  presenteth  as  full  of  grace  ;  and  so,  my  brethren,  the  re- 
conciliation being  preached,  as  done  for  the  behoof  of  man- 
kind in  general,  mankind  in  general  are  visited  with  the  glad 
tidings,  and  left  without  excuse,  if  they  draw  not  near  to  a 
reconciled  God.  This,  our  ministry  being  accomplished,  and 
you  believing  the  same,  it  remaineth  then  for  you,  through 
Christ's  mediation,  to  transact  with  God  ;  and,  when  your 
spirit  invisible  doth  with  the  invisible  God  transact,  through 
the  mediation  of  Christ,  we  are  ta,ught  to  declare  unto  you, 
that  God  will  manifest  Himself  in  your  souls  in  a  way  which 
no  tongue  can  tell  of  Then  beginneth  the  true  work  of 
effectual  calling,  regeneration,  sanctification,  and  the  new 
life,  when  the  soul,  believing  to  have  found  redemption  in 
Christ,  doth  cast  itself  upon  God,  and  doth  receive  unto  itself 
the  manifestations  of  His  love.  But  this  is  an  invisible  being, 
a  spiritual  work.  It  is  a  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God  :  it  is 
foolishness  unto  the  world,  enthusiasm,  empiricism,  fanati- 
cism, whereof  some  of  the  outward  manifestations  are  to  be 
seen  in  the  subjection  of  the  flesh,  and  the  cessation  of  its 
works  ;  but  whereof  the  glorious  fulness  is  known  only  to  the 
soul,  which  is  conscious  thereof  This  is  that  which  flows 
from  the  Father's  fountain-will,  directly  into  the  soul  of  a 
believer  in  Christ  the  Redeemer,  and  a  believing  observer  of 
the  ordinances  of  Christ,  the  great  Head  and  High  Priest  of 
the  Church.  Unto  the  edge  of  this  surpassing  blessedness 
and  immortal  glory  Christ  bringeth  you  all  ;  and  saith  unto 
you  by  our  mouth,  Pass  over,  pass  over  into  the  enjoyment 
of  God,  the  Invisible  and  Incomprehensible.  Commit  your- 
self to  Him — commit  yourself  to  Him  in  faith,  and  fearlessly. 
See  what  He  hath  done  for  you  by  Me:  let  that  be  your 
warrant  to  trust  Him  for  the  rest.  Pass  onward,  pass  forward 
into  the  absolute  and  unrevealed  will  of  God.  And  thus  all 
the  virtue  of  Christ's  work,  and  all  the  virtue  of  the  preach- 
ing of  it,  amounteth  unto  this,  of  shewing  the  intelligent 
creation  what  grace  there  is  in  God,  and  counteracting  all 


ELECTION  NO  HINDRANCE.  25  i 

murmurlngs  which  might  have  come  from  the  inheritance 
of  a  fallen  nature  ;  yea,  not  only  counteracting,  but  through 
the  Fall  presenting  the  universal  grace  of  God  in  His  Son, 
and  there  leaving  us  suspended  upon  that  gracious  will, 
that  absolute  will  of  God  in  Christ,  revealed  to  be  gra- 
cious. The  end  of  the  revealed  Godhead  is  to  draw  us 
to  worship,  and  to  have  intercourse  with,  the  unrevealed 
Godhead.  The  revealed  Godhead  standing  in  the  person  of 
the  Son,  being,  verily,  no  more  than  God's  appeal  unto  the 
comprehension  of  His  creatures,  unto  that  part  of  His  crea- 
ture man  which  holdeth  of  the  visible,  in  order  that  the 
spiritual  part,  which  holdeth  not  of  the  visible,  may  have  to 
do  with  the  unrevealed  Godhead  standing  hidden  in  the  per- 
son of  the  Father.  And  redemption  endcth  where  election 
beginneth.  Redemption  is  no  more  than  the  porch  which 
introduceth  unto  the  temple  of  election.  It  appertaineth, 
therefore,  unto  the  Father,  and  to  Him  alone,  to  seal  a  soul 
which  Christ  hath  redeemed. 

Having  made  known  unto  you  these  two  great  truths,  how 
Christ's  reconciliation  between  your  sinful  substance  and  the 
Godhead  hath  been  produced ;  and  that  this  the  Father  hath 
done  in  order  to  bring  you  unto  the  acknowledgment  of  His 
right  and  sovereignty  in  you  ;  I  leave  you  there  to  transact 
for  yourselves  with  the  Father.  It  is  vain  to  ask  how  the 
election  of  the  Father  proceedeth.  If  I  could  tell  how,  if  it 
depended  on  any  conditions  Avhich  man  can  apprehend,  then 
the  very  end  of  it  would  be  destroyed  :  it  would  come  under 
the  visible,  the  comprehensible,  the  revealed  ;  under  which,  if 
all  were  brought  that  concerneth  us,  then  I  ask,  what  would 
remain  to  bind  us  to  the  invisible  .-'  The  redemption  is  com- 
prehensible and  visible,  and  applicable  in  common,  to  the 
very  end  that  the  election  may  be  invisible,  incomprehen- 
sible, and  revealed  only  to  the  person  of  the  individual. 
With  the  same  diligence  with  which  we  preach  the  redemp- 
tion to  be  the  common  privilege  of  mankind,  we  preach  the 
election  to  be  the  special  communication  of  the  Father  unto 
individual  souls :  and  this  is  religion,  this  is  godliness,  even 
such  communication  and  intercourse  between  the  spirit  and 
the  Father  of  spirits.     Revelation  is  not  religion,  but  revela- 


2  52        THE  INC  A  RNA  TION—ITS  ME  THOD. 

tion  is  unto  religion.  The  Church  is  not  salvation,  but  the 
Church  is  unto  salvation.  To  the  end,  therefore,  of  hanging 
and  suspending  the  whole  creation  from  His  will,  through 
the  mediation  of  Christ,  the  Father  hath  limited  the  salvation 
unto  a  portion  of  mankind,  while  He  hath  made  the  recon- 
ciliation common  to  them  all.  If  He  had  made  the  salvation 
likewise  universal,  then  there  would  have  been  nothing  left 
with  Himself:  the  creature  would  have  ascribed  its  salvation 
unto  the  revealed  Godhead  alone,  and  would  never  have 
known  nor  acknowledged  an  unrevealed  Godhead,  which  is 
the  beginning  and  the  end  of  all  worship.  But,  as  it  now  is, 
we  know  God  in  Christ,  and  knowing  what  is  revealed  in 
Him,  we  commit  ourselves  to  Him  in  faith ;  and  through 
faith  we  receive  from  the  trusted  Father  the  seal  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Redemption,  therefore,  by  Christ, — I  say  it  again, 
redemption  by  Christ  is  only  the  stepping-stone  unto  faith  in 
the  electing  Father ;  and  through  that  faith  in  one  unknown, 
at  least  in  that  part  of  His  will  which  is  unknown,  through 
such  honour  of  the  invisible  Godhead  we  receive  the  seal  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  or  the  impartation  and  communication  of 
the  gift  which  the  Father  hath  kept  in  His  own  power. 

The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  communication  to  the 
individual  of  the  electing  love  of  God,  unto  his  soul  in  parti- 
cular, as  the  work  of  Christ  in  flesh  is  the  gift  of  reconcilia- 
tion unto  the  world  in  general.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  not 
the  mere  reconciliation  ;  but  it  is  that  which  God  thereto 
addeth  of  His  special  and  electing  grace ;  the  fruit  of  pure 
faith  in  the  unrevealed  will  of  God.  The  work  of  Christ 
holdeth  as  much  of  knowledge  as  it  doth  of  faith :  I  mean 
the  work  which  He  wrought  in  the  flesh,  and  which  is  re- 
corded in  the  word  of  God.  This  must  be  known  before  it 
can  be  revealed.  It  is  faith  resting  upon  knowledge.  But 
the  faith  which  is  followed  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a 
faith  wholly  upon  the  invisible.  It  is  the  faith  of  a  promise, 
and,  to  all  human  appearance,  an  impossibility  that  God  can 
create  in  us  a  new  nature,  diverse  from  and  opposite  to  the 
old.  This  is  the  work  which  gives  individuality  and  per- 
sonality to  a  man.  This  is  the  work  which  exalts  and  digni- 
fies a  man — a  work  unto  which  no  other  man  can  help  him — 


ELECTION  NO  HINDRANCE.  253 

and  I  may  say,  not  the  whole  Church,  nor  the  written  word, 
nor  Christ  the  crucified,  but  the  Father  only.  And  in  this 
way,  all  Christ's  work  in  the  flesh  doth  but  honour  the  in- 
visible Father  the  more,  bringing  all  the  benefits  of  His 
passion  and  death  to  weigh  and  poise  the  world  back  into  its 
places  of  dependency  from  the  visible  throne.  Christ  in  the 
flesh  is  the  great  example  of  faith  upon  the  invisible  Father, 
as  He  is  likewise  the  great  example  of  faith  rewarded  with 
the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  lived  by  faith,  even  as 
we  do  live  by  faith.  Now,  because  Christ  did  thus  glorify 
the  Father,  and,  wherever  His  gospel  is  proclaimed,  doth 
glorify  the  Father :  therefore  the  Father  glorifieth  Christ,  the 
risen  Christ,  the  ruling  Christ,  by  giving  unto  Him  power  to 
communicate  of  His  victory  over  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the 
flesh,  unto  as  many  as  the  Father  pleaseth,  unto  all  those 
who,  receiving  the  reconciliation  at  the  hands  of  the  Peace- 
maker, having  the  faith  of  the  promise,  cast  themselves  upon 
the  gracious  Father.  "  To  them  that  received  him,  gave  he 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
on  his  name  ;  which  are  born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of 
the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  The  invisible 
Father,  I  say,  doth  glorify  His  risen  Son,  doth  glorify  the 
manhood  of  His  risen  Son,  by  appointing  and  ordaining  that 
the  regeneration,  sanctification,  and  salvation  of  His  elect 
ones  should  proceed  through  the  risen  man  Jesus  Christ,  unto 
and  upon  all  who  believe  in  the  reconciliation  wrought  in 
Jesus  Christ  while  tabernacling  in  flesh,  and  wrestling  with 
its  infirmities.  Therefore  is  Christ  the  Head  of  the  Church 
by  power  communicated  to  Him  at  His  resurrection,  as  He 
is  Head  of  the  creation  by  virtue  of  His  holy  life,  meritori- 
ous death,  and  incorrupt  resurrection.  All  that  the  Father 
hath  given  unto  Him  He  feedeth  with  a  rod  of  love,  and 
bringeth  with  a  rod  of  power  out  of  the  prison-house  of  the 
grave.  And  how,  then,  doth  Christ  communicate  of  this  power 
which  He  hath  received .-'  Doth  He  do  over  again  in  our 
flesh  what  He  did  in  His  own }  No  verily.  His  own  flesh 
He  sanctified,  ours  He  doth  never  sanctify  until  the  resurrec- 
tion. Sin  never  dwelt  in  His  flesh  so  as  to  prevail  over  the 
holiness  which  was  in  Him.     But  this  cannot  be  said  of  men  ; 


254        T^HE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD. 

no,  not  of  the  greatest  saints ;  in  whom  there  is  an  original 
and  an  actual  sin,  for  which  they  shall  see  corruption. 

What  is  it,  then,  which  Christ  bestoweth  ?  As  Adam  did 
not  communicate  unto  Cain  his  unfallen,  but  his  fallen  like- 
ness, so  doth  Christ  not  communicate  unto  His  children  the 
likeness  of  His  humility,  but  the  likeness  of  His  power.  He 
regenerateth  not  by  power  antecedent,  but  posterior,  to  His 
resurrection.  The  new  man,  therefore,  is  after  the  likeness  of 
the  risen  Christ,  inheritor  of  His  joy,  of  His  power,  and  of 
His  glory.  And  thus  the  regenerate  have  a  double  image  : 
in  the  flesh,  bearing  the  image  of  the  earthly  ;  in  the  spirit, 
bearing  the  Spirit  of  the  heavenly  Adam  ; — as  to  the  former, 
holding  of  the  curse  ;  as  to  the  latter,  holding  of  the  blessing ; 
— as  to  the  former,  holding  of  the  cross  ;  as  to  the  latter, 
holding  of  the  resurrection.  But  because  Christ  is  greater 
than  all,  and  because  He  is  ruling  in  the  Church  for  the 
Father,  we  know  that  the  child  of  Christ,  which  is  born  by 
regeneration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  us,  is  stronger  and  mightier, 
and  able  to  subdue  and  subject  the  child  of  Adam,  which  we 
have  by  generation,  though  upholden  by  the  devil,  the  world, 
and  the  flesh. — Christ's  life  in  the  flesh  was  a  life  of  law-keep- 
ing ;  and  because  He  kept  the  law.  He  arose  into  a  life  which 
knoweth  no  law,  but  is  of  all  things  the  living  law ;  and  of 
this  life  it  is  that  He  doth  communicate  unto  us.  The  Holy 
Spirit,  taking  possession  of  us,  and  making  His  habitation  in 
us,  doth  reveal  unto  us  power  from  on  high  ;  whereby  we  are 
able  to  put  to  death  the  rebel  flesh,  and  so  be  done  Avith  the 
condemning  law :  for  when  the  flesh  is  dead,  the  law  hath  no 
more  to  say.  The  executioner  is  satisfied,  when  the  traitor 
is  lying  dead  at  his  feet.  And  thus  the  Spirit  of  Christ  doth 
satisfy  the  law,  and  make  it  honourable,  by  quelling  and  kill- 
ing the  guilty  body  of  sin  and  death.  This  is  the  way  that 
Christ  makes  the  law  honourable  in  us  now,  by  putting  down 
and  suppressing  that  rebel  flesh  which  ever  riseth  in  mutiny 
against  the  law  :  and  there  the  law  standeth  in  its  iron-crested 
pride,  satisfied  the  meanwhile  to  have  made  clean  work  with 
the  rebels,  but  awaiting  still  the  higher  satisfaction  of  serving 
God  as  the  rule  of  flesh  and  blood,  the  guide,  the  blessing 
thereof;  no  longer  its  oppressor,  its  imprisoner,  and  its  mur- 


ELECTION  NO  HINDRANCE.  255 

derer.  This  was  not  the  condition  of  Christ's  flesh,  which  the 
Spirit  enabled  to  keep  the  law,  and  to  fulfil  all  righteousness  : 
so  that,  though  obnoxious  to  sin,  it  never  sinned  ;  and  though 
obnoxious  to  death,  like  other  flesh,  it  did  not  sec  corruption, 
which  is  the  work  of  death.  As  sin  tried  Him  always,  but 
could  prevail  over  Him  never,  the  Spirit  ever  enabling  His 
soul  to  reject  it ;  so  death  took  Him,  but  could  not  prevail 
over  Him  that  He  should  sec  corruption,  the  Spirit  inter- 
posing and  raising  Him  to  see  glory.  But  we  both  sin  with 
our  flesh,  and  our  flesh,  so  long  as  it  liveth,  cannot  cease  from 
sin ;  and  when  we  die,  our  flesh  shall  see  corruption,  be- 
cause it  hath  sinned.  The  only  possibility  of  righteousness, 
therefore,  in  this  fallen,  sinful  creature,  is  by  a  premature 
death,  so  to  speak  ;  and  this  is  what  the  Spirit  accomplish- 
eth,  enabling  us,  as  it  were,  with  our  own  hand  to  slay,  not 
our  child,  but  our  very  self;  and  in  slaying  ourself  to  slay  our 
children  also,  so  that  they  shall  be  born  holy,  and  baptized 
as  it  were  in  our  baptism.  Mystery  most  profound,  mystery 
most  fruitful,  which  hath  been  to  me  the  consolation  of  many 
unknown  and  unutterable  wringings  of  the  heart ! 

This  power  which  Christ  hath  to  change  the  very  being  of 
the  living  man,  and  as  it  were  to  strike  a  mighty  power  to  the 
extremities  of  the  living  flesh,  is  shewn  unto  us  by  the  tri- 
umphant debate  which  He  made  with  the  powers  camped  in 
His  flesh,  and  waging  war  therein;  paralysing  them,  defeating 
them,  destroying  them  ;  and,  being  so,  what  remaineth  that 
He  cannot  do  }  Is  He  not  able,  is  He  not  much  more  able, 
being  glorified,  to  beat  back,  and  astonish,  and  freeze  into 
death,  those  powers  of  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  that 
are  camped  in  you  and  me  ?  Verily,  verily,  as  He  hath  suf- 
fered in  the  flesh  Himself,  He  can  arm  us  with  the  same  mind, 
that  we,  suffering  in  the  flesh,  may  cease  from  sin.  So  can 
He  bring  us  into  death,  as  He  brought  Himself  into  death  ; 
and  so  are  we  crucified  with  Him.  And  we  are  buried  with 
Him  ;  and  so  our  bodies,  which  could  not  be  united  with  Him 
in  this  life,  are  united  with  Him  by  death,  and  rest  in  this 
grave  until  the  resurrection.  But  this  mortification  of  the  old 
man,  this  putting  oft"  of  his  corruptions  and  lusts,  is  not  the 
whole  of  the  Spirit's  work,  proceeding  from  the  risen  Christ. 


256        THE  INCARNATION— ITS  METHOD. 

Yea,  I  may  say,  it  is  only  the  preparation  for  His  work,  only 
the  death  and  burial  unto  a  resurrection  ;  for  we  rise  with 
Christ  to  newness  of  life,  we  are  planted  in  the  likeness  of  His 
death,  only  that  we  may  be  in  the  likeness  of  His  resurrec- 
tion. The  body,  every  member  of  the  body,  is  not  only 
separated  from  being  the  members  of  the  harlot  flesh,  but  is 
betrothed  and  wedded  unto  the  risen  body  of  Christ.  There- 
fore the  Spirit  killeth  only  to  make  alive.  If  He  sendeth  the 
chill  touch  of  death  throughout  the  bounds  of  flesh  and  blood, 
it  is  but  that  He  may  send  the  touch  of  life  through  the 
bounds  of  flesh  and  blood.  He  begetteth  a  life  from  the 
dead,  in  every  regenerate  man  ;  and  where  His  work  is,  there 
is  not  only  the  agonies  of  dying  flesh,  and  the  shudder  of 
death,  but  there  is  the  thrill  of  life,  of  immortal  life,  and  the 
power  of  an  irresistible  holiness,  and  the  security  of  an  invio- 
lable peace,  and  the  brightness  of  an  indestructible  joy.  This 
change  in  the  spirit  of  our  mind,  this  prevalency  of  the  risen 
powers  of  creation  in  Christ's  hand,  wielded  over  the  powers 
of  the  fallen  creation,  resting  still  in  Satan's  withered  hand,  is 
the  manifestation  of  the  Father's  electing  love,  in  the  heart  of 
every  chosen  one.  And  can  the  man,  who  this  possesseth,  be 
ignorant  that  he  possesseth  it .''  and  must  he  go  and  try  its 
measure  by  the  Ten  Commandments  .-•  Out  upon  such  an 
idle  tale !  The  man  who  hath  received  this  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  a  man  invested  with  the  holiness  of  a  priest,  and 
with  the  power  of  a  king,  and  with  the  knowledge  of  a  prophet. 
Light  is  the  habitation  of  his  soul;  he  dwelleth  in  light;  he  is  in 
the  light.  He  is  holy,  as  saith  the  apostle,  and  cannot  sin  be- 
cause he  is  born  of  God.  The  flesh,  by  reason  of  unbelief  and 
traffic  with  the  law,  may  awake  and  sin,  yea,  and  attain  unto 
such  a  prurient  lustfulness,  as  that  it  may  be  necessary  for  the 
Church  to  give  such  a  one  to  Satan,  for  the  destruction  of 
the  flesh,  that  his  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord  :  and  such  a  one  may  be  brought  into  deep  waters ; 
and  great  straits,  and  doubts,  and  perplexities  may  beset 
him  round ;  but  whence  are  these  doubts  t  from  the  devil. 
And  why  hath  the  devil  power  against  him }  Because  he 
believeth  not  that  Christ  hath  bruised  his  head.  How  shall 
such  a  one  be  delivered  .■'      By  doing  for  him  what  I  have 


ELECTION  NO  HINDRANCE.  257 

now  been  attempting;  even  by  shewing  him  the  common 
reconcihation,  and  so  leading  him  onwards  into  the  know- 
ledge, or  rather  the  mystery,  of  God's  election,  and  of  the 
Spirit's  procession  through  Christ  to  work  in  him  the  death 
unto  sin,  and  the  resurrection  unto  holiness. 


VOL.  V. 


IV. 

THE  PREPARATION  FOR,  AND  THE  VERY  ACT  OF,  THE 
INCARNATION  OF  CHRIST. 

John  i.  14. 
And  the  Word  ivas  made  flesh. 

"PXEARLY  beloved  brethren,  from  what  I  have  taught  you 
"^'^  of  late,  that  the  humiliation  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  is 
only  a  part  of  the  revelation  of  the  WORD  OF  GOD  ;  and,  as  it 
were,  one  scene  in  the  great  act  of  the  Son,  who  devoted 
Himself  from  everlasting  to  the  work  of  manifesting  the 
grace  of  God,  by  taking  upon  Him  the  nature  of  fallen  sin- 
ners ;  I  would  not  have  you  to  infer  that  I  do  thereby  under- 
value the  veiled  and  suffering  humanity  of  the  Lord,  as  a 
most  necessary  part  in  that  whole,  to  the  comprehension  of 
which  I  would  endeavour  to  enlarge  your  mind.  The  mani- 
festation of  the  Son  of  God  in  flesh  fulfilled  all  that  went 
before  in  the  promises  and  revelations  of  God,  and  prepared 
the  way  for  all  that  followed  after ;  but  it  was  not  that  which 
went  before,  nor  was  it  that  which  followed  after.  The  cove- 
nant with  Abraham  is  something,  and  the  Mosaic  economy  is 
something,  and  the  present  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  is  some- 
thing, and  the  glorious  age  that  is  to  come  is  something ; 
each  bearing  relations  most  important  to,  and  mainly  depend- 
ing upon,  the  humiliation  and  fleshly  tabernacle  of  Christ; 
incomplete  without  it,  and  to  be  diligently  studied  in  con- 
nexion therewith,  but  not  to  be  set  aside  nor  superseded  by 
the  single  contemplation  of  that  mystery  which  is  only  a  stage 
in  the  great  progression  of  the  world's  redemption.  Christ  in 
flesh  embodied  in  Himself,  and  personified,  every  rite  and 
ordinance,  type  and  symbol,  of  the  former  dispensation,  which 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  259 

stood  in  carnal  observances.  His  human  soul  was  the  living 
law,  His  body  was  the  living  temple,  His  flesh  was  the  living 
sacrifice,  which  when  He  offered  upon  the  cross  the  law  was 
fulfilled,  the  sacredness  of  the  temple  was  profaned,  the  sin- 
offering  was  made  to  cease,  and  the  former  dispensation  had 
attained  its  end  of  righteousness,  and  was  finished,  as  having 
completed  the  purpose  of  God  in  its  construction.  The  Jeru- 
salem on  earth  had  served  her  purpose  when  she  had  brought 
forth  Christ.  She  was  His  mother,  according  to  the  flesh  ; 
and  having  rejected  the  holy  child  Jesus,  in  whom  she  held 
all  the  promises,  and  out  of  whom  she  had  no  title  to  any, 
the  least,  privilege,  she  was  cast  out,  and  hath  continued 
vagabond  since,  without  king,  or  priest,  or  sceptre,  or  land, 
or  settled  habitation.  And  this  is  one  great  end  of  the  incar- 
nation, to  complete  the  fleshly  temple,  which  was  then  begin- 
ning and  building  up  of  Christ,  and  of  which  Christ  was  the 
chief  corner-stone,  as  He  is  also  to  b^  brought  out,  with 
strength,  as  the  chief  corner-stone  of  the  spiritual  temple, 
which  at  present  is  building  up. 

The  ceremonial  part  of  the  former  dispensation,  was,  as  it 
were,  the  rudiments  of  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  the  reality 
of  it  all,  even  as  His  glorious  presence  in  the  future  dispen- 
sation will  be  the  reality  of  all  that  we  now  believe  and  hope 
for  in  the  Spirit. — The  temple,  in  all  its  parts,  was  but  the 
symbol  of  His  holy  human  nature  ;  and  the  word  of  Jehovah 
who  dwelt  in  the  temple,  and  gave  His  oracles  there,  was  but 
the  presentiment  of  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  which  was  to 
dwell  in  Him  bodily. — The  common  court  of  Israel,  where 
the  nation  might  assemble,  and  in  whose  precincts  the  daily 
sacrifice  was  offered,  with  its  morning  and  evening  prayer, 
was  the  emblem  of  that  communion  and  converse  which  He 
carried  on  in  the  presence  of  all  the  Jewish  people  (for  He 
was  "  a  minister  of  the  circumcision  ")  who  came  to  Him,  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh,  offering  their  prayers  for  every  want, 
affliction,  and  distress,  which  He  remedied ;  and  in  whose 
sight,  also.  He  offered  the  paschal  lamb,  the  great  atonement- 
sacrifice,  which  for  ever  perfected  all  that  are  sanctified. — The 
holy  place,  in  which  was  the  candlestick  and  the  shewbread, 
the  two  great  symbols  of  light  and  life,  was  the  emblem  of 


2  6o  THE  INCARNATION: 

that  more  close  and  internal  converse  to  which  He  admitted 
His  faithful  disciples  and  elected  ones,  "  the  royal  priesthood 
and  people,  for  a  possession,"  with  whom  almost  every  dis- 
course He  held,  as  it  is  recorded  in  John,  doth  proceed  upon 
His  office  as  the  light  "and  life  of  man. — And  for  the  holiest 
of  all,  which  was  the  abode  of  the  Godhead ;  into  this  mys- 
terious part  of  His  being,  His  Divinity,  few  of  His  disciples 
were  able  to  enter,  until  His  flesh  had  been  rent,  which 
so  far  from  being  the  revelation,  was  the  veil  before  the 
most  holy,  which  needed  to  be  rent  in  twain  upon  the  cross, 
that  by  the  Spirit  we  might  enter  into  the  Divinity  of 
Christ,  which  is  the  abode  of  the  Father,  and  our  abode 
through  faith  ;  through  which  veil  the  apostles  had  occasional 
glimpses,  yet  could  they  not  wholly  penetrate  the  mystery, 
until  the  Spirit  was  given ;  for  which  reason  it  was  needful 
that  He  should  go  away.  And,  dear  brethren,  it  seemeth 
good  to  me  to  warn  you,  that  at  this  time  the  clear  insight 
into  His  Divinity  appears  to  be  departing  from  the  Church, 
whereof  they  hold  not  the  high  discourse,  nor  shew  the  deep 
and  full  conviction,  which  gave  such  glory  to  the  days  of 
other  times. — And,  finally,  to  complete  this  emblem  of,  and 
preparation  for,  the  incarnation  ;  as  there  was  a  court  for  the 
Gentiles,  where  they  might  behold,  though  at  a  distance,  and 
witness  the  going  in  and  out,  and  hear  as  it  were  the  rumour 
of  the  holy  things,  so  our  Lord  might  not,  while  incarnate, 
nor  His  ministers,  profane  the  children's  bread,  by  giving  it 
unto  the  dogs,  though  He  refused  not  to  feed  them  with  the 
crumbs,  and  to  encourage  them  with  the  hope  of  a  speedy 
admission  into  the  holiest  place.  So  that  our  Lord's  flesh 
was  the  true  temple,  the  pure  and  holy  temple  :  as  He  said, 
the  first  time  He  was  revealed  unto  the  people,  "Destroy 
this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up  again  ;  speak- 
ing of  the  temple  of  his  body."  And  in  this,  I  think,  consists 
a  great  use  of  the  incarnation, — to  interpret  the  former  wor- 
ship, and  realise  all  its  shadows  ;  to  fill  with  meaning  all  its 
words,  and  all  its  ordinances  with  power.  In  this  sense  the 
incarnation  was  the  perfection  and  accomplishment  of  religion 
to  the  Jew;  but  to  the  Christian,  in  this  sense,  it  is  of  a  very 
secondary  use;  because  upon  the  cross  that  fleshly  tabernacle 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  261 

was  rent,  and  with  it  that  whole  dispensation  passed  away 
whereof  it  was  the  living  reality  which  had  taken  life  for  the 
very  end  of  being  crucified  and  slain,  and  carrying  flesh  to  the 
grave,  and  with  it  all  fleshly  ordinances  :  now,  when  the  reality 
ceased,  surely  much  more  did  this  shadow  cease? 

This  leadeth  us  to  observe  a  second,  and  yet  more  ancient, 
intimation  and  introduction  of  the  incarnation,  contained  in 
the  institution  of  sacrifices  ;  and  a  second  use  of  the  incarna- 
tion, that  thereby  He  might  become  the  true,  the  only  real, 
sacrifice.  His  living  body  was  the  temple.  His  dead  body 
was  the  sacrifice.  From  the  first  creation  of  man,  the  word  of 
God  unto  His  creature  was,  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof, 
thou  shalt  surely  die."  And  that  the  creature  died  not  in  the 
day  that  he  ate  thereof,  is  the  greatest  mystery  upon  record. 
Let  any  man  unfold  to  me  why  man  died  not  when  he  dis- 
obeyed the  commandment,  which  said,  Thou  shalt  die  when 
thou  dost  transgress.  In  the  very  staying  of  that  word  of  God, 
we,  who  have  been  enlightened  in  the  nature  of  sin,  can  dis- 
cover the  mystery  of  the  Godhead.  It  is  nothing  to  say, 
that  from  thenceforth,  in  the  word  of  God,  it  hath  been  a  con- 
stant manner  of  His  to  threaten  and  not  perform.  That  doth 
only  magnify  and  multiply  the  difficulty.  Why  ahvays 
threatening,  and  akvays  withholding .-'  What  meaneth  this 
recession  and  shrinking  in  the  Divine  mind ;  in  the  True 
One  ;  in  the  Almighty  ;  in  the  Unchangeable  ;  in  the  Creator 
of  the  steadfast  world  .-"  He  who  hath  put  all  things  under  such 
invariable  laws  and  ordinances,  doth  Himselfonly  change  and 
fluctuate !  This,  the  character  of  the  first  threatening  and 
every  succeeding  one,  hath  explanation  only  by  the  separation 
of  the  personality  of  THE  WORD.  The  holy  will  of  God  de- 
clareth  its  holy  purpose  of  justice  and  righteousness;  THE 
Word  refuseth  not  to  declare  it,  but  addeth  thereto  words  of 
grace  and  mercy.  Whence  come  these  .'*  From  His  own  inde- 
pendent being  and  self-existence;  from  His  own  unconstrained 
love;  from  His  everlasting  dedication  of  Himself  to  redeem 
us :  which  though  the  Father  was  well  pleased  withal,  yet  did 
He  continually  declare  His  holiness,  and  execute  it  also  ; 
which  tlic  Word  failed  not  to  declare,  adding  thereto  the  de- 
claration of  mercy  and  hope  descending  through  the  channel 


262  THE  INCARNATION: 

of  His  mediation,  by  virtue  of  His  own  free-will  offering  of 
Himself     But  that  man  might  know,  that  the  curse  of  death 
still  depended  over  him — and  that  a  death  by  violence,  by 
slaying — sacrifice  was  instituted,  and  became  universal  upon 
the  earth  ;  and  that  the  sacrifice  by  blood,  not  the  offering  of 
first-fruits  merely.     The  offering  of  first-fruits  was  a  confes- 
sion that  he  held  the  earth  of  God's  mercy  :  but  this  was  not 
enough ;  he  must  offer  blood,  in  order  to  shew  that  he  held 
life  also  of  God's  mercy ;  that  life  was  yet  to  be  required, 
and  the  curse  yet  to  be  accomplished  ;  the  full  curse — as  it  is 
written,  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  surely 
die:"  that  is.  That  human  nature,  wrapt  up  in  thee,  shall  die : 
human  nature  in  its  perfection  and  completeness  shall  die : 
thou,  sinful  Adam,  art  not  now  worthy  to  be  the  sacrifice : 
another  Adam,  sinless  and  spotless,  of  whom  thou,  O  man, 
art  the  type,  and  thou,  O  woman,  the  mother,  shall  die,  to 
purchase  life  for  Himself  and  for  all  who  are  chosen,  in  Him, 
to  suffer  with  Him  and  to  live  with  Him.     And  to  the  end  of 
symbolising  this  great  truth,  and  preserving  it  in  an  ordi- 
nance for  ever,  sacrifice  was  appointed.    For,  brethren,  I  hold 
with  the  old  school  of  divines,  in  believing  that  sacrifice  was 
in  the  world  from  the  Fall,  because  it  is  the  first  act  which  is 
recorded  after  the  Fall ;  and  that  it  contained  in  itself  a 
threefold  use — first,  the  declaration  of  sin  ;  secondly,  the  sig- 
nification that  by  blood  the  guilt  of  sin  was  to  be  cleansed 
away ;  and  thirdly,  that  by  fire  the  purification  of  all  which 
sin  had  defiled  was  to  be  accomplished.     The  substance  of 
which  symbol  Cain  did  deny,  and  so  despised  and  desecrated 
the  ordinance  of  God  ;  wherefore  God  forsook  him,  and  he 
became  a  murderer  and  a  vagabond    upon  the  earth,  the 
proto-apostate   from   the    Church,  as  Abel  was   the   proto- 
martyr.     For  it  is  the  way  of  the  Lord  to  come  swiftly  in 
judgment  upon  the  first  breach  of  any  ordinance ;    as  we 
see  in  Corah's  rebellion,  in  Achan's    transgression,  and   in 
Ananias's  lying  unto  the  Holy  Spirit:  by  which  swift  ven- 
geance I  am  the  more  convinced  that  sacrifice  was  an  ordi- 
nance of  God  from  the  beginning :  in  the  observance  of  which 
Noah  took  possession  of  the  earth  by  sacrifice  ;  and  Abraham 
took  possession  of  the  promise  by  a  more  clear  and  signifi- 


ITS  PR  EPA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  26 


o 


cant  sacrifice  of  his  own  son,  which  was  done  in  spirit,  though 
not  in  the  very  act ;  and  the  children  of  Israel  took  posses- 
sion of  the  land,  and  kept  possession  of  it,  in  the  daily  offer- 
ing up,  evening  and  morning,  of  a  sacrifice,  and  annually  on 
the  day  of  atonement ;  and,  as  Paul  well  concludes,  "  almost 
everything  under  the  law  was  purified  with  blood,  and  without 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  Whereby  it  was  al- 
ways signified  that  every  national,  and  personal,  and  natural 
blessing,  the  people  of  God,  yea,  the  whole  world  (for  Adam 
and  Noah  were  the  fathers  of  all)  did  hold  only  in  the  antici- 
pation of  that  great  sacrifice  of  His  body  which  the  Son  of  God 
had  provided  from  all  eternity,  when  He  said,  "  Sacrifice  and 
burnt-ofifering  thou  wouldest  not,  but  a  body  hast  thou  pro- 
vided me:"  or,  in  other  words,  that  from  the  Fall  man  was 
possessed  of  nothing  in  his  own  right,  no,  not  of  his  own  life, 
but  held  everything  in  the  light  of  that  woman's  Seed  which 
was  promised  to  our  first  parents,  and  of  that  atonement,  or 
satisfaction,  or  purchase,  or  redemption,  which  He  was  to 
offer  up  ;  in  the  expectation  of  which  the  very  world  had  its 
being  preserved,  and  was  peopled  with  animation,  with  spi- 
ritual promises  enriched,  and  with  a  dispensation  of  grace 
and  of  glory  over-canopied.  But  if  there  were  no  spiritual 
guilt,  why  be  at  such  endless  pains  to  translate  it  into  sen- 
sual signification  .'*  What  mean  those  bloody  conditions  of 
every  blessing,  this  dark  foreboding  of  some  future  pledge 
and  title,  if  so  be  that  man  stood  free  before  his  Maker, 
clothed  with  rights  in  himself,  and  invested  in  his  own  right- 
ful possession  }  Adam  and  Abel  and  Enoch,  Noah  and  Mel- 
chizedec,  Abraham  and  the  patriarchs,  Moses  and  the  pro- 
phets, and  every  one  in  whom  any  light  abode,  knew  their 
true  standing  before  the  Lord,  and  regarded  themselves  but 
as  pilgrims  and  sojourners,  permitted  to  live  and  breathe, 
privileged  to  believe  and  hope,  until  He  should  come  who,  in 
His  own  title  of  perfect  and  sufficient  Man,  should  purchase 
back  the  right  and  title  of  man  to  the  earth,  which  had  been 
lost  by  the  Fall  ;  should  roll  back  the  tide  of  sin  and  death 
which  had  burst  in  by  that  gate,  opened  of  Satan  ;  and 
gather  up  again  unto  Himself,  as  the  Head,  those  disjointed 
fragments  of  being,  which  would  never  have  been  disjointed 


264  THE  INCARNATION: 

and  dispersed  had  not  the  first  Adam  fallen  from  his  high 
estate.  For  this  end,  therefore,  He  became  manifest, — not 
only  to  complete  the  typical  temple,  by  giving  it  a  fleshly, 
living  reality  ;  but  to  accomplish  that  redemption  and  recon- 
ciliation of  the  Creator  to  the  creature,  which  the  service  of 
that  temple  had  signified ;  which  His  life  and  death  did  ac- 
complish. And  for  this  end  it  was  necessary  that  He  should 
be  the  self-existent  Jehovah,  as  well  as  the  Son  of  man,  in 
order  that,  by  the  humiliation  of  the  former  to  the  mortal 
conditions  of  the  latter,  He  might  take  up  the  latter  into  the 
Divine  conditions  of  the  former ;  the  Divine  nature  being  as 
the  golden  altar  upon  which  He  offered  the  sacrifice  of  His 
human  nature. 

The  third  great  intimation  and  introduction  of  the  incar- 
nation was  in  the  prophetic  dispensation  completed  and  ful- 
filled in  Christ.  By  which  I  do  not  mean  that  His  incarna- 
tion fulfilled  all  the  prophecies  which  went  before  upon  Him 
— a  monstrous  figment,  which  neither  Jew  nor  Christian  can 
believe,  otherwise  than  by  blinding  their  understanding,  or 
spiritualising  away  the  letter  and  substance  of  all  the  pro- 
phecies, whereof  by  far  the  greater  part,  I  might  say  almost 
nine  out  of  ten,  remain  to  be  completely  accomplished  in  His 
second  coming ; — but  I  mean  what  Daniel  expresseth,  "  to 
seal  up  the  vision  and  the  prophecy  ;"  which  He  did  by 
becoming  the  Prophet  and  Teacher  of  His  Church.  In  con- 
nexion with  the  primitive  dispensation  of  sacrifice,  and  the  pri- 
mitive worship,  which  were  embodied  into  a  national  form  by 
the  Mosaical  economy,  there  was  also  a  dispensation  of  word 
or  prophecy  ;  which  is  revelation,  properly  so  called  ;  being, 
as  it  were,  the  voice  of  the  universal  reason  speaking  to  the 
reason  of  man  from  the  body  of  those  visible  ordinances  which 
stood  before  His  sense.  For  there  never  was  an  ordinance  or 
institution  without  a  word  of  prophecy  which  portended  that 
the  great  Prophet  would  come  when  the  substance  of  these 
shadows  should  come.  Therefore  Noah  was  a  prophet,  and 
Abraham,  and  Moses,  and  David,  and  every  one  who  had  any 
hand  in  the  building  up  of  God's  worship  and  the  preservation 
of  His  laws  ;  and  when  the  race  of  priests  was  reserved  for 
the  family  of  Levi,  a  race  of  prophets  was  raised  up  of  all 


ITS  PRE  PAR  A  riON  AND  ACT.  265 

tribes,  as  it  pleased  the  word  of  God  to  visit  them  :  who  were 
the  interpreters  of  Providence,  the  denouncers  of  wickedness, 
the  guardians  of  the  moral  law,  and,  in  short,  the  preachers  of 
spiritual  righteousness.  As  the  priests  waited  upon  the 
temple,  and  were,  so  to  speak,  the  body-servants  of  Christ ; 
so  the  prophets  waited  upon  the  word  of  Christ,  and  were  the 
forerunners  and  messengers  of  His  counsels, — not  those  who 
sat  in  council  with  Him;  for  who  hath  been  His  counsellor  ? 
the  Child  that  was  to  be  born,  His  name  was  to  be  called 
THE  Counsellor, — but  the  messengers  of  His  counsels.  His 
forerunners,  who  warned  the  nations  what  and  what  manner 
of  person  He  was  to  be  whose  goings  forth  had  been  from 
everlasting.  When  the  Word  became  incarnate,  this  dispen- 
sation also  came  to  an  end  ;  as  the  planets  disappear  at  the 
rising  of  the  sun,  or  as  the  ambassadors  fall  into  the  train  of 
servants  upon  the  appearance  of  their  king  and  lord.  When 
it  is  said,  that  "the  Word  became  flesh,"  it  is  not  meant 
merely  that  He  became  body,  but  that  He  became  also  a 
reasonable  human  soul,  shewing  to  our  body  its  perfect  holi- 
ness, and  to  our  mind  its  perfect  holiness.  He  was  the  clear 
and  bright  intelligence,  the  consummate  wisdom,  the  pure 
reason,  the  perfect  righteousness  of  man,  as  well  as  the  out- 
ward and  undefiled,  the  holy  and  harmless  body  of  man. 
Now,  this  is  what  is  meant  when  we  say  He  was  our  Prophet: 
that  there  is  nothing,  within  the  compass  of  human  reason 
and  power,  which  He  possessed  not,  and  which  He  declared 
not.  With  respect  to  the  sciences  and  arts  which  concern 
the  visible  world,  and  enter  by  the  sense,  our  Lord  possessed 
them,  as  Adam  did,  by  instinct;  wherefore  all  elements  obeyed 
Him  :  but  He  revealed  them  not  to  His  people,  because  they 
help  not,  neither  are  congenial  to,  that  spiritual  dispensation 
devoid  of  outward  power  which  His  incarnation  ushered  in ; 
but  they  are  outstanding  to  the  hope  of  His  people,  when  He 
shall  come,  clothed  with  power,  to  bring  them  into  the  pos- 
session of  the  earth  with  sacerdotal  and  royal  state;  as  hereto- 
fore Adam  had  possession  of  the  garden  of  Eden — happy  type 
of  this  purified  world!  But  of  the  spiritual  and  invisible  He 
revealed  the  perfect  consummation  ;  and  nothing  hath  been, 
nor  can  be,  added  thereto.      And,  observe  you,  when   He 


266  THE  INCARNATION: 

afterwards  appeared  unto  John  in  Patmos,  to  make  known 
the  glory  of  His  coming  kingdom,  He  appeared  in  person,  and 
did  not  by  His  Spirit  inspire,  but  came  and  gave  that  which 
God  had  given  unto  Him ;  wherefore  it  is  entitled,  "  the  Re- 
velation of  Jesus  Christ  which  God  gave  him."  And  be  it 
further  observed  concerning  this  revelation,  that  it  was  given 
in  His  character  of  our  risen  High  Priest,  not  of  incarnate 
Prophet ;  for  the  reason,  that  His  priesthood  was  not  entered 
into  till  after  His  death,  when  He  ascended  up  on  high  ; 
nor  the  power  given  into  His  hand  over  heaven  and  earth. 
And  not  before  the  beginning  of  that  book  styleth  He 
himself  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.  Which  book 
of  the  Revelation  is  the  successive  acts  of  His  Father,  in 
putting  all  enemies  under  His  feet,  before  bringing  Him  in 
glory  into  the  earth.  Since  His  resurrection,  Christ  hath 
become  not  only  the  Head  of  His  Church  on  earth,  but  the 
Ruler  of  the  nations ;  and  that  book  of  the  Apocalypse  is 
nothing  else  than  the  Acts  of  Christ,  the  eternal  King,  im- 
mortal and  invisible,  the  only  living  and  true  God.  With 
respect  to  the  writings  of  the  apostles  which  are  preserved, 
and  their  infinite  discourses  which  are  not  preserved,  they 
were  the  seeds  which  the  incarnate  Word  had  sown  in  their 
hearts,  ripened  by  the  Spirit,  who  was  promised  to  bring  all 
things  to  their  remembrance.  And  this  is  manifest  from  the 
continual  appeal  of  the  apostles  to  the  prophets  when  dis- 
coursing with  the  Jews,  and,  doubtless,  to  the  very  words  of 
the  Lord  when  discoursing  to  the  believers.  Nay,  but  what 
else  are  the  Gospels  than  the  record  of  Jesus,  which  these 
apostles  were  wont  to  give  in  all  their  ministrations  .''  W^hence 
it  came  to  pass,  that  when  Paul  was  called  to  the  apostolic 
office,  he  received  instructions  directly  from  the  Lord  himself, 
and  resteth  his  authority  as  an  apostle  upon  that  foundation. 
The  Spirit  ripened  the  spiritual  seed  which  the  Son  of  man 
had  sown ;  gave  at  Pentecost  the  first-fruits  ;  and  is  yet  to 
give  the  latter  rain  upon  the  earth :  after  which  cometh  the 
harvest.  And  believe  what  I  am  now  to  say,  brethren  :  that 
there  are  in  this  book  of  God's  holy  word  more  seed  still  un- 
quickened  than  hath  yet  quickened  in  all  the  commentaries 
of  the  Church,  or  been  accomplished  in  the  providence  of 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  267 

God ;  and  which  shall  quicken  in  the  fulness  of  the  times. 
It  is  in  this  office  of  the  Prophet  that  He  becomes  the  object 
of  all  faith,  is  the  wisdom  of  His  Church,  is  both  the  sower 
and  the  seed  which  is  sown,  the  householder  and  the  treasure 
from  which  the  stewards  and  the  household  are  supplied 
with  their  food  ;  "  For  it  is  of  his  fulness  that  we  all  receive, 
and  grace  for  grace."  And  of  Him,  in  this  office,  the  prophets 
were  the  continual  admonitors  and  heralds  of  His  coming : 
as  it  is  written,  "  The  spirit  of  prophecy  is  the  testimony  of 
Jesus." 

From  these  three  intimations  and  indications  of  Messiah, 
contained  in  the  Sacrifices,  in  the  Levitical  Priesthood,  and 
the  Prophetic  Vocation,  it  is  manifest  that  there  will  be  found 
many  mysteries  in  the  person  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  ; 
though  in  respect  to  these  His  various  offices,  as  Sacrifice, 
High  Priest,  and  Prophet,  there  be  no  more  doubt  than  that 
the  sun  shineth  in  the  heavens,  and  giveth  light  unto  the 
earth.  Into  the  mystery,  for  example,  of  the  union  between 
the  Divine  and  human  nature,  it  is  hard  to  enter ;  and  those 
who  have  dared  it  too  far  have  most  frequently  lost  them- 
selves in  error.  It  is  revealed  that  His  body  was  created  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin 
Mary,  that  He  might  be  the  woman's  Seed,  according  to  the 
promise.  He  grew  in  wisdom  as  He  grew  in  years,  like  any 
other  child  ;  though  He  was  from  the  womb  the  very  Word 
of  God,  which  had  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and 
spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  prophets  :  who  was  conscious 
of  the  eternity  of  His  being,  and  of  the  blessedness  thereof, 
before  the  world  was.  And  He  was  obedient  to  the  Law,  in 
its  letter  and  in  its  spirit ;  and  He  made  the  word  of  God 
His  meditation,  as  we  do ;  and  He  lived  by  faith  upon  it,  as 
do  all  His  people.  He  prayed,  and  was  strengthened  by 
prayer,  as  we  are :  He  was  afflicted  with  all  our  afflictions, 
and  tried  with  all  our  trials,  and  was  sustained  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  as  we.  For  we  arc  not  to  suppose, 
with  the  early  heretics,  that  His  body  was  only  an  appear- 
ance, or  illusion,  but  a  real  manifestation  of  the  Second  Per- 
son of  the  blessed  Trinity  as  man.      He  was  not  the  Only- 


268  THE  INCARNATION: 

begotten  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  at  the  same  time  that 
He  was  the  Messiah  on  earth  ;  but  He  was  the  Only-begotten 
come  out  of  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  in  order  to  become  the 
Messiah  upon  earth.  The  Word  had  been  revealed  in  the 
universal  creation  once,  but  now  He  is  to  be  revealed  in  the 
individual  man.  In  the  former  work  the  individual  was  seen 
in  the  universal ;  in  the  latter  the  universal  is  to  be  revealed 
in  the  individual,  and  gathered  into  Him.  It  was  a  high 
honour  put  upon  human  nature ;  but  it  was  for  a  very  high 
object;  which  we  know  only  in  part,  and  which  will  doubt- 
less illustrate  the  being  and  glory  of  the  Godhead  more  than 
the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  No  wonder  that 
the  Word  of  God,  foreseeing  this  great  act  of  His  incarnation, 
should  speak  of  it  by  the  mouth  of  all  His  prophets  :  for  it  is 
a  singular  act,  whose  extraordinary  wonderfulness  shall  reach 
through  all  eternity.  No  wonder  that  the  rumour  of  it  came 
before,  nor  that  sacrifice  should  be  instituted  to  signify  it, 
and  the  tabernacle  to  witness  it,  and  the  temple  to  confirm  it, 
and  the  whole  Jewish  state  to  be,  as  it  were,  the  womb  of  this 
great  conception ;  in  the  foresight  of  which  the  prophet 
bursteth  forth  so  sublimely  :  "  For  unto  us  a  Child  is  born, 
unto  us  a  Son  is  given ;  and  the  government  shall  be  upon 
his  shoulder ;  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Coun- 
sellor, The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of 
Peace."  He  was  anointed  to  His  holy  office  by  the  Spirit  in 
the  form  of  a  dove ;  and  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God, 
whom  the  people  were  to  hear.  And  it  was  by  the  Spirit 
that  He  was  led  into  temptation  ;  and  it  was  by  the  Spirit 
that  the  man  Jesus  Christ  prevailed.  Whatever  power  He 
might  possess  otherwise,  it  is  certain  He  prevailed  against 
Satan  by  that  word  and  Spirit  by  which  we  are  to  prevail. 
He  was  travelling  in  the  valley  of  humility;  and  it  was  no 
pretence  of  doing  so,  but  it  was  so.  He  was  emptied:  He 
did  not  seem  to  be  emptied,  but  He  was  so.  And  He 
preached  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  was  upon  Him,  and 
with  which  He  had  been  anointed.  And  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  He  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing  them 
that  were  possessed  "  with  the  devil."  And  the  Chief  Shep- 
herd of  the  sheep  offered    Himself  by  the   eternal    Spirit. 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  269 

And  He  was  justified  in  the  Spirit,  by  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead.  So  that  in  very  deed,  and  in  very  truth.  He  was 
the  man  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  man,  the  second  Adam  ; 
who  hath  now  joined  the  human  nature  to  the  Divine,  and  is 
become  a  quickening  Spirit ;  baptizing  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
all  who  believe  in  His  name  and  receive  Him  as  the  Prophet 
of  God  ;  bestowing  the  regeneration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
fellowship  of  His  priesthood,  and  the  inheritance  of  His  glori- 
ous kingdom.  Without,  therefore,  adventuring  into  that  subtle 
speculation  in  which  so  many  of  the  early  heretics  lost  them- 
selves, I  would  rather  proceed  humbly,  with  the  Holy  Scriptures 
in  my  hand,  to  set  forth  in  order  the  work  of  the  humiliation 
and  ministry  of  Christ  Jesus  in  the  flesh :  which  I  conceive 
to  be  of  the  last  importance  in  this  argument  of  the  in- 
carnation ;  being,  in  truth,  both  the  meritorious  and  prevail- 
ing cause  of  our  justification  before  God,  and  the  great  ex- 
ample to  every  child  of  the  Holy  Spirit — that  is,  to  every 
member  of  His  Church.  From  the  day  of  His  baptism  until 
the  day  of  His  death,  I  conceive  that  He  sustained  the  very 
trials,  and  achieved  the  very  victories,  into  the  fellowship  of 
which  we  are  called  from  the  day  of  our  baptism  to  the  day 
of  our  death,  and  into  the  actual  fellowship  of  which  we  enter 
from  the  day  of  our  regeneration  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  until  we 
are  delivered  from  this  body  of  sin  and  death,  under  which  we, 
who  have  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  do  groan. 

And  yet  I  approach  this  subject  with  a  certain  awe,  which 
nothing  can  overcome,  save  the  necessity,  to  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Church,  that  you  should  be  well  acquainted  with 
your  great  Prototype,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  your  faith  : 
for  the  mystery  of  it  is  very  great.  I  confess  that  it  has  been 
a  relief  to  me  to  look  at  it  under  the  veil  of  the  Levitical  dis- 
pensation ;  and  I  tremble  'to  approach  the  confines  of  the 
naked  sufferings  of  the  Lord.  For  He  condescended  to  dwell 
in  concert  and  communion  with  flesh  ;  to  look  up  through 
fleshly  eyes  ;  by  fleshly  senses  to  converse  with  the  great 
wickedness  of  the  earth ;  and,  through  the  faculties  of  the 
human  soul,  to  commune  with  every  impious,  ungodly,  and 
blasphemous  chamber  of  the  fallen  intellect  and  feeling  of 
men.     Whereof,  brethren,  the  condescension  overcometh  me : 


2  70  THE  INCARNATION: 

I  cannot  attain  unto  the  understanding  of  it.  For  the  Divine 
and  Almighty  Creator  to  empty  Himself  of  Himself,  to  take 
the  limitation  of  a  creature,  and  bind  Himself  under  the  ap- 
pointed law  of  the  action  and  suffering  thereof,  is  very 
wonderful ;  but  for  the  Holy  Creator,  the  thrice-holy  One,  by 
dwelling  therein,  to  bring  Himself  into  actual  communication 
with,  real  sense  of,  and  sympathy  in,  all  the  wickedness  of 
this  world,  passeth  all  humiliation  which  can  be  conceived. 
That  His  Divine  nature  should  suffer  such  contradiction  of 
sinners  as  He  endured,  and  bear  such  limitations  of  power  ; 
should  endure  such  a  pressure  of  iniquity  as  His  human  na- 
ture. His  sin-bearing  body,  brought  Him  into  the  sense,  feel- 
ing, bondage,  and  suffering  of ;  is  the  depth  of  the  mystery 
of  godliness.  And  herein  consisteth  the  greatness  of  His  love 
in  enduring,  the  greatness  of  His  Father's  love  in  giving  Him 
up  to  endure,  our  nature.  It  is  not  in  the  kind  of  life  or  kind 
of  death  ;  it  is  in  the  life  and  the  death  of  the  Man-God  that 
we  are  to  find  the  great  merit  of  the  love.  The  Jiiiiniliatioji 
was  the  sacrifice ;  the  becoming  man,  the  being  made  flesh. 
For  the  rest,  it  is  only,  as  it  were,  the  wise  adaptation  of  the 
act  to  something  past  and  to  something  future  :  the  act  itself 
is  that  in  which  the  marvel  lies.  The  Gospels  of  His  human 
life  are  of  great  value,  as  containing  the  ratification  and  ful- 
filment of  the  former  covenant,  as  laying  out  the  platform  and 
scheme  of  the  new  covenant  or  spiritual  dispensation,  and 
presenting  us  with  the  pattern  of  the  perfect  man  before  the 
Lord  ;  but  it  is  the  fourth  Gospel,  that  of  St  John,  as  com- 
mented upon  and  broadly  illustrated  in  St  Paul's  Epistles, 
which  makes  us  familiar  with  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  mani- 
fested in  Him  bodily.  And  here  I  must  declare,  that  I  love 
not  the  carnal  estimate  of  Christ's  visible  sufferings  as  a  man, 
and  of  His  death  as  a  man,  save  only  as  they  give  heart  to  His 
disciples  passing  through  the  same  scenes  of  trial,  and  shew  us 
the  reality  of  His  passive  manhood.  But  as  the  measure  of  what 
all  His  elect  would  have  had  to  suffer  through  all  eternity, 
and  a  set-off  against  this,  in  the  way  of  barter  or  exchange,  I 
must  confess  it  appears  to  me  to  be  a  poor,  petty,  dishonour- 
able, insufficient  view  of  the  matter,  which  the  thinnest-witted 
Socinian  will  blow  to  atoms  by  a  breath.     The  whole  act  of 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  271 

the  incarnation  is  a  mystery  to  the  fleshly  man,  and  ought 
not  to  be  debased  down  to  his  fleshly  sympathies.  It  is  the 
basest  part  of  Popery  to  have  done  so,  with  their  crosses  and 
relics,  and  their  true  blood,  true  tears,  and  true  sweat.  The 
spiritual  have  nothing  to  do  with  such  matters.  Let  it  abide 
a  mystery  of  love  for  the  heart  and  mind,  as  they  are  en- 
lightened and  purified  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  enter  into, 
further,  and  further,  and  still  further,  until  they  be  separated 
from  this  spirit-clouding  flesh  and  carnal  mind  :  for  it  is  only 
to  be  apprehended  according  as  we  have  Christ  formed  within 
us  by  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  when,  not  by  the  natural  mind,  nor 
the  natural  heart,  but  by  the  spiritual  mind  and  heart,  we  do 
enter  into  the  great  mystery  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Son  of 
God  while  incarnate  in  a  fleshly  body  ; — as  we  now  proceed 
to  shew  in  this  discourse,  praying  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  our 
guide  through  the  deep  valley,  while  we  descend  into  those 
lowly  abasements  of  being  into  which  the  Son  of  God  de- 
scended for  our  sakes. 

Now,  in  considering  this  great  subject,  it  falleth  asunder 
before  my  thoughts  into  these  two  great  divisions  : — 

First,  All  that  He  passed  through  till  death,  in  the  face  of 
men. 

Secondly,  All  that  He  went  through,  between  death  and 
the  resurrection,  in  the  disembodied  soul,  by  His  descent  into 
hell. 

I.  Of  these,  the  former  falls  again  apart  into  these  three 
subdivisions  :  First,  His  struggle  with,  and  victory  over, 
Satan  and  the  evil  angels  ;  sec'ondly,  over  sin  in  human 
nature ;  and,  thirdly,  over  that  confederacy  of  wickedness 
into  which  these  two  great  co-operating  causes  of  evil  have 
wrought  the  world  of  wicked  men.  For  these  three,  Satan 
with  his  host,  sin  in  flesh,  and  sinful  men  confederate  in  the 
world,  did  chiefly  mar  the  glory  of  God,  and  eclipse  it  over 
all  this  world,  and  over  all  to  which  this  world,  in  the  purpose 
of  God,  may  be  intended  to  administer.  Besides,  who  knows 
the  evil  influence  and  efl"ects  which  may  have  been,  or  might 
be,  brought  over  the  unfallen  hosts  of  heaven,  by  perceiving 
a  world  framed  for  holiness  and  excellence  and  beauty, 
usurped  and  gotten  possession  of,  as  it  were  against  God's 


2  72  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

will,  (though  in  truth  by  His  permission,  for  far  greater  ends,) 
by  the  prince  of  evil,  and  apostate  son  of  the  morning  ?  It 
was,  therefore,  no  small  work  to  take  off  the  eclipse  which  the 
Almighty  had  thus  permitted  to  come  upon  the  face  of  His 
glory,  and  to  re-establish  that  almightiness  of  power  which 
seemed  to  hang  in  doubt,  and  plant  the  stabihty  of  all  things 
upon  a  new  basis,  by  redeeming  and  recovering  the  lost 
world,  and  making  it  more  glorious  than  ever ;  while  the 
evil  powers  which  had  dared  to  peep  and  to  mutter  against 
Him,  and  to  stir  up  strife  anew,  should  be  utterly  undone, 
and  left  in  everlasting  pasSiveness  of  suffering  and  miserable 
abjectness.  And  as  the  end  to  be  accomplished  was  truly 
very  great,  yea,  the  greatest  possible,  (creation  being  nothing 
so  great  a  work  as  the  redemption  of  creation  against  all 
power  and  might,)  so  the  labour  and  travail  which  had  to 
be  undergone  for  its  accomplishment  was  proportionably 
great,  yea,  I  may  say,  stupendously,  inconceivably  great. 
Into  the  mystery  of  which  travail  of  the  Son  of  man  to  ac- 
complish the  same,  I  would  inquire,  that  we  may  be  a  little 
able  to  measure  the  greatness  of  the  achievement,  by  the 
greatness  of  the  endurance  in  compassing  it.  Now,  because 
the  object  was  threefold, — to  retrieve  God's  glorious  and 
almighty  power  out  of  the  controversy  and  debate  of  Satan 
and  his  power ;  to  retrieve  God's  goodly  work  of  man 
from  the  oppression  of  sin  and  death,  and  renew  man  in  His 
image,  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness ;  and  to  recover  this 
world  from  that  wicked  confederacy  of  evil  beings  who  have 
grieved  and  afflicted  its  peace,  who  have  wrecked  and  ruined 
its  prospects  since  the  Fall ; — therefore  have  I  said  that  the 
travail  of  the  Son  of  man,  in  this  great  undertaking,  was  also 
threefold  :  First,  in  engaging  with  Satan  and  his  host,  in  judg- 
ing him,  and  destroying  his  works ;  secondly,  in  engaging 
with  sin  in  flesh,  and  overcoming  it,  and  condemning  it ; 
thirdly,  in  wrestling  with  the  confederacy  of  the  wicked 
world,  and  finally  overcoming  it.  Into  these  three  things  let 
us  now  inquire  in  order. 

I.  The  subtle  devices  of  Satan  and  his  angels,  with  their 
innumerable  snares ;  the  fierce  and  fiery  assaults  of  spiritual 
might,  brought  forward  with  that  array  of  angelic  light  and 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  A  ND  ACT.  273 

glorious  appearance  which  Lucifer  the  son  of  the  morning 
can  trick  himself  withal ;  all  the  mystery  of  deceivablencss 
with  which  every  member  of  Christ,  and  the  whole  body  of 
Christ,  hath  been  assaulted  and  overcome  :  were,  there  can 
be  no  doubt,  combined  and  concentrated  against  our  great 
Covenant-Head  and  Surety  during  the  days  of  His  flesh. 
Into  which  field  of  spiritual  warfare  the  spiritual  only  can 
enter,  and  they  but  very  imperfectly  ;  forasmuch  as  we  are 
not  now  exposed  defenceless,  but  have  obtained,  through 
Christ,  a  shelter  and  a  shield  against  his  fiery  darts,  and  have 
to  deal,  as  it  were,  with  a  beaten  and  conquered  foe,  who  is 
enraged,  but  is  not  empowered,  against  us  ;  whereas  the  Son 
of  man  had  the  unhumbled  conqueror  to  conquer,  and  the 
proud  captor  to  lead  captive,  the  possessor  to  disinherit,  the 
strong  and  mighty  usurper  to  cast  out.  A  most  unbridled 
and  unrestrained  commission  that  was  which  Satan  had  given 
to  him  against  Job,  whose  humiliation  was  yet  but  the  type 
of  that  which  was  to  come  in  Christ ;  and  Job  was  sore  dis- 
tressed for  a  while,  but  not  given  over  to  death  :  for,  after  he 
had  suffered  a  while,  God  did  recover  him,  restore  him,  and 
enlarge  him  exceedingly :  but  Satan  had  power  against  the 
Son  of  man  to  bereave  Him  of  all  comfort,  and  to  eclipse  His 
Divinity  of  all  glory,  and  to  spread  the  heavens  with  sack- 
cloth, and  to  seal  up  every  star,  to  bring  Him  into  a  fearful 
pit  of  darkness  and  tribulation,  and  even  unto  the  dust  of 
death.  He  who  came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil  must 
be  prepared  against  the  devil's  utmost  might  :  and  doubt 
there  can  be  none,  that  not  a  power  in  the  air  or  in  the  earth, 
in  the  grave  or  in  hell,  but  was  moved,  and  to  the  uttermost, 
stirred  up,  to  tempt,  and  overcome,  and  utterly  overwhelm 
the  Son  of  God.  Into  which  I  feel  myself  wholly  unable  to 
enter,  being  content  to  know  that  the  power  which  hereto- 
fore prevailed  to  raise  rebellion  in  heaven,  and  to  intro- 
duce death  into  the  world,  and  which  is  nearest  to  the  power 
of  God — so  near  to  it,  yea,  and,  in  the  appearance  of  this 
fallen  earth,  so  much  above  it,  that  the  ancient  heretics  of 
the  early  Church  were  always  equalising  them  ;  and  certain 
apostate  churches  to  this  day  do  worship  the  devil  rather 
than  God  ; — this  power,  I  say,  of  strength,  and  seduction,  and 
VOL.  V.  S 


2  74  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

cruel  trial,  which  I  can  neither  understand  nor  describe,  I  am 
content  to  know,  and  do  most  certainly  believe,  was  wrestled 
with  by  the  Son  of  man  during  all  the  days  of  His  flesh,  and 
overcome,  and  condemned ;  and  though  for  a  while  left  still 
at  large,  in  order  to  prove  the  election,  and  shew  forth  the 
power  of  Christ  in  them,  is  soon  to  be  restrained  and  impri- 
soned for  a  thousand  years  ;  and,  after  being  brought  up  for 
trial,  to  be  condemned,  and  stripped,  and  made  passive  and 
miserable  for  ever  and  ever.  Which  bereaving  of  spiritual 
wickednesses  in  heavenly  places,  as  I  believe  it  to  be  the  chief 
end  and  greatest  achievement  of  the  incarnation,  so  I  believe 
it  to  have  cost  the  most  fearful  pains  and  agonies  ;  whereof 
the  deep-seated  source  and  extreme  suffering  is  hid  from  all 
but  the  most  spiritual,  and  to  these  but  very  imperfectly  re- 
vealed. If  the  apostle  Paul,  when  summoning  the  Christian 
soldier  into  the  field,  and  clothing  him  in  all  his  armour, 
doth,  in  order  to  put  him  on  his  guard,  and  call  forth  all  his 
strength,  tell  him  that  he  had  to  wage  a  battle  not  with  flesh 
and  blood  only,  but  with  principalities  and  with  powers,  with 
the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world,  with  spiritual  wicked- 
nesses in  high  places  ;  then  may  I  well  say  that  the  Captain 
of  our  salvation,  in  whose  footsteps  we  tread,  and  in  whose 
all-victorious  name  we  charge  the  enemy,  did  certainly 
wrestle  not  against  the  infirmities  and  temptations  of  hu- 
man nature  only,  but  against  all  the  host  of  the  high  ones 
which  are  on  high,  Satan  and  his  angels,  the  rulers  of  the 
darkness  of  this  world,  the  spiritual  wickednesses  in  high 
places.  Wherefore  it  is  written  in  the  Colossians,  "  Having 
spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made  a  show  of  them 
openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  himself."  That  this  was 
one  great,  and  indeed  the  great  end  of  His  incarnation  and 
death,  we  are  expressly  assured  by  the  apostle  to  the  He- 
brews :  "  Forasmuch,  then,  as  the  children  were  partakers  of 
flesh  and  blood,  he  himself  also  took  part  of  the  same,  that 
by  death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death, 
which  is  the  devil," 

2.  The  second  great  head  of  our  Lord's  humiliation  was  His 
contest  with  sin  in  the  flesh  ;  which  brings  us  properly  into  the 
regions  of  humanity  :  and  to  understand  which,  it  is  necessary 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  275 

to  have  a  sufficient  and  worthy  idea  of  the  Divine  law  ;  for 
"the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law."  Which  holy  and  just  and  vener- 
able law  is  become  very  terrible  to  a  fallen  creature,  meetino- 
him  on  every  side,  and  engirdling  him  with  a  thousand  deaths. 
Every  commandment  saith,  Do  this  or  die  ;  and  nature  re- 
plies. But  I  cannot  do  it.  Die,  then,  saith  the  inexorable 
law. — Dost  thou  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart 
and  soul  and  strength  and  mind  ?  No.  Then  die  thou  must. 
— Dost  thou  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.^  No.  Then 
thou  must  die. — ^\Vhat }  for  one  sin  death  }  Yea,  death  for 
the  least  transgression.  And,  moreover,  if  thou  keep  the 
whole  law,  and  offend  but  in  one  point,  thou  art  guilty 
of  all. — "  The  law  revived,  and  I  died."  Oh,  fearful  con- 
dition, into  which  the  Fall  hath  brought  mankind  !  an  estate 
truly  of  sin  and  misery  !  Now,  brethren,  this  law,  this  in- 
exorable law,  stood  around  the  Son  of  man  with  its  fiery 
points  of  death,  as  it  standeth  around  every  one  of  us. 
For  He  had  come  into  humanity's  accursed  region;  and 
His  flesh,  His  human  nature,  was  as  assailable  on  every 
side  as  is  ours  :  otherwise  it  had  not  been  human  nature. 
"  Forasmuch  as  the  children  were  partakers  of  flesh  and 
blood,  he  himself  also  took  part  of  the  same."  ..."  In  all 
things  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren." 
..."  In  that  he  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,  he  is 
able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted."  ..."  For  we  have 
not  an  high  priest  that  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of 
our  infirmities,  but  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are." 
Wherefore  I  believe  that  the  Son  of  man  was  assailable  on 
the  side  of  His  flesh,  or  human  nature,  with  every  temptation, 
with  every  infirmity,  to  which  I  or  any  one  now  hearing  me 
is  obnoxious.  Did  not  Satan  address  the  sense  by  its  strongest, 
sternest  craving,  when  he  tempted  the  hungered  Son  of  man 
to  turn  the  stones  of  the  wilderness  into  bread  .''  Did  he  not 
tempt  the  lust  of  the  eye,  when  he  shewed  Him  all  the  king- 
doms of  the  earth,  for  the  guerdon  of  which  to  worship  him  .'* 
And  with  what  craftiness  and  mystery  of  arch-angelic  deceit 
wrought  he  upon  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  man,  when  he  quoted 
Scripture,  and  dared  him  to  put  it  to  the  proof!  Did  I  but 
say  that  I  believed  the  Son  of  man  was  proved  and  tried  with 


276  THE  INCARNATION: 

all  the  proofs  and  trials  which  my  human  nature,  and  the 
human  nature  of  every  one  hearing  me,  is  or  hath  been  tried 
withal  ?  I  should  have  said,  that  He  was  tried  with  every 
trial  with  which  it  x?,  possible  for  human  nature  to  be  tried  by 
the  putting  forth  of  all  the  subtlety  and  power  of  Satan.  For 
how  were  He  able  to  succour  all  them  that  have  been,  that 
are,  or  that  shall  be  tempted,  if  He  had  not  undergone  the 
sum  and  substance  of  all  possible  temptation  ?  Therefore  is 
it  most  true  that  He  bore  our  sicknesses  and  carried  our  sins; 
that  "  He  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief." 

Behold,  then,  the  Son  of  man  compressing  within  the  short 
period  of  His  prophetic  office  the  sum-total  of  all  mankind's 
liability  to  be  tempted  unto  sin :  conceive  every  variety  of 
human  passion,  every  variety  of  human  affection,  every  variety 
of  human  error,  every  variety  of  human  wickedness,  which 
hath  ever  been  realised,  or  is  possible  to  be  realised,  inherent 
in  the  humanity  and  combined  against  the  holiness  of  Him 
who  was  not  only  a  man,  but  the  Son  of  man,  the  heir  of  all 
the  infirmities  which  man  entaileth  upon  his  children,  which 
He  took  freely  and  fully  upon  Him,  all  to  bear ;  and,  bearing 
all,  to  annihilate  all ;  and  to  bring  in  a  righteousness,  universal 
as  the  Fall  and  the  temptation  was  universal  :  and  then  shall 
you  have  an  idea  of  the  Son  of  man's  oppression  and  load  ; 
against  whom,  thus  on  every  side  beset  behind  and  before, 
stood  up  the  law,  as  widely  comprehensive  as  the  temptation, 
and  said  to  Him,  Thou  art  man,  very  man,  though  Thou  be 
very  God  :  as  very  man  receive  Thou  these  continual  assaults  ; 
and  yield  to  one  of  them,  and  Thou  also  shalt  die. — The  Son 
of  God  die  .'*  The  Life  die .''  Brethren,  I  know  it  could  not 
be,  I  know  it  hath  not  been ;  but  I  am  shewing  you  the  proof 
to  which  the  Son  of  God  was  put,  the  hideous  and  enormous 
proof  to  which  He  was  put :  for  otherwise  you  shall  neither 
have  an  adequate  idea  of  the  truth — the  comfortable,  the  all- 
comforting  truth — of  His  manhood  ;  nor  an  adequate  idea  of 
the  almighty  power  and  infinite  love  of  His  Godhead.  Sin 
had  its  fullest  range  against  the  Son  of  God  by  virtue  of  His 
being  the  Son  of  man.  The  law  laid  its  full  curse  upon  Him. 
His  Divinity  screened  Him  not  a  jot.  It  bore  Him  through 
it,  but  it  saved  Him  not  a  jot.    We  had  not  known  the  power 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  277 

of  the  Divinity  to  contend  with  sin,  otherwise  than  by  the 
incarnation.  Sin  would  have  seemed  omnipotent,  and  death 
inevitable,  and  Satan  invincible;  having  an  indefeasible  right, 
an  unanswerable  claim,  and  a  power  never  to  be  gainsaid 
nor  to  be  cast  out,  where  once  they  had  got  a  footing.  It  is 
thus  that  God  is  glorified  by  the  Godhead  contending  against 
sin  in  flesh,  overcoming  it,  and  proving  it  to  be  weaker  than 
God  in  its  own  region  ;  not  capable  of  resisting  God,  not 
capable  of  holding  those  whom  He  would  redeem. 

Oh,  but  consider  the  humiliation  of  this  act  of  the  Son  of 
God,  "  who  was  in  the  form  of  God,  and  thought  it  not  rob- 
bery to  be  equal  with  God;"  that  He  should  "become  sin 
for  us  who  knew  no  sin ;"  that  He  should  endure  the  vile 
contact  and  evil  neighbourhood  of  every  wickedness ;  that 
He  should  bear  the  suggestion  of  every  heinous  wickedness, 
as  Satan  suggested  those  three  temptations  of  the  wilderness ; 
as  wicked  men  suggested,  yea,  suspected  Him  of  every  evil. 
Lot's  inhabitation  of  Sodom  was  a  poor  emblem  of  this  ; 
because  Lot  had  not  known  the  immaculate  purity  of  God, 
nor  did  sustain  in  himself  the  glory  of  the  holiness  of  God. 
And  yet,  if  we  will  come  at  the  idea  of  the  great  condescen- 
sion and  painfulness  of  the  thrice-holy  Son  of  God's  enduring 
in  flesh  the  neighbourhood  and  assaults  of  all  sin,  it  must  be 
by  means  of  such  emblems  as  that  of  Lot  abiding  in  Sodom  ; 
or  David,  the  royal  exile,  changing  his  behaviour,  and  forced 
to  feign  madness,  while  he  abode  at  the  court  of  the  king  of 
Gath ;  or  of  Elijah,  weary  of  life  under  the  persecutions  of 
Ahab  and  Jezebel,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  land  ;  or  of 
Moses  coming  down  from  the  holy  mount  of  God  to  the  con- 
gregation of  idolaters,  at  the  sight  of  which  the  meekest  of 
men  was  so  transported  with  wrath  and  indignation  that  he 
dashed  to  the  ground  the  tables  of  the  law,  which  God's  own 
finger  had  written.  All  which  emblems,  with  whatever  others 
the  Scriptures  contain,  are  utterly  worthless,  though  the  best 
that  can  be  found,  for  expressing  the  continual  griefs  and  in- 
conceivable troubles  which  the  holy  and  righteous  Jehovah 
must  have  undergone  by  taking  up  into  Himself  human  na- 
ture, and  becoming,  on  the  one  hand,  conversant  with,  tempted 
and  continually  assaulted  by,  every  form  of  wickedness;  while, 


278  THE  INCARNATION: 

on  the  other  hand,  He  had  in  Him  the  Divine  hatred  of  sin, 
that  strongest  antipathy,  that  eternal  opposition  which  there 
is  in  God  to  all  unrighteousness.  I  say,  it  was  such  a  recon- 
ciliation of  opposite  and  contradictory  things,  such  a  har- 
mony and  intermarriage  of  extremes  was  this  union  of  the 
Divine  and  human  natures,  as  never,  never  entered  into  any 
finite  conception  to  conceive,  as  no  finite  understanding  shall 
ever  be  able  to  understand.  And  what  patience  to  bear  it 
without  a  murmur!  with  just  so  much  expression  of  anguish 
as  to  mark  the  abhorrence  of  it,  but  never  a  complaint,  never 
a  resistance,  never  a  rebellious  emotion !  Moses  was  trans- 
ported with  wrath  when  he  came  out  of  the  holy  pres- 
ence into  the  polluted  camp ;  Elijah  prayed  hard  to  die, 
and  be  done  with  the  trouble  and  weariness  of  his  life  ; 
and  Job  cursed  the  day  of  his  birth,  and  prayed  hard  for 
the  day  of  his  death  ;  and  David,  to  save  his  life,  played 
a  false  part,  and  soon  wearied  of  the  unnatural  form  which 
he  had  taken  upon  him  ;  and  Jeremiah  fainted  and  yielded, 
and  went  hard  to  upbraid  God ;  but  the  Son  of  man  carried 
Himself  most  meekly  :  "  When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not 
again  ;  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not."  "  He  was  led 
as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter  ;  and  as  a  sheep  before  his  shearers 
is  dumb,  so  he  opened  not  his  mouth."  He  bore.  He  perse- 
vered to  bear  and  to  endure,  the  passive  flesh  open  to  tempta- 
tion by  every  pore,  and  assailed  with  temptation  by  every 
avenue  through  which  the  angels  of  darkness  are  wont  to  per- 
secute and  assail  all  living  men. 

3.  This  leadeth  me  to  observe,  in  the  third  place,  the  con- 
tradiction of  sinners  which  He  endured  against  Himself,  as 
another,  though  an  inferior,  region  of  that  continual  and  in- 
cessant grief  which  the  Son  of  man  bore  during  the  days  of 
His  flesh,  and  from  which  He  desired  gladly  to  escape,  when 
the  work  which  His  Father  had  given  Him  to  do  was  com- 
pleted ;  to  escape  away  from  the  humility,  unto  the  glory 
with  which  God  would  straightway  glorify  Him,  who  had 
with  so  much  patient  humiliation  glorified  God.  These  per- 
secutions of  men  I  reckon  to  be  an  inferior  region  of  trial 
and  suffering  to  that  which  is  occupied  by  the  spiritual 
wickednesses  in  high  places :  because  the  power  of  men  to 


ITS  PRE  PARA  TION  AND  ACT.  279 

hurt  is  so  narrow  and  limited,  compared  with  that  of  the 
wicked  spirits,  who  have  usurped  possession  of  the  air  and  of 
the  earth,  Avhose  various  elements  they  can  bring  to  bear 
upon  the  naked  head  of  every  one  whom  God  permitteth 
them  to  work  against.  And  never  had  they  such  law  and 
luxury  of  mischief  against  any  as  against  the  Son  of  man, 
whom  they  made  houseless  and  homeless  upon  the  land  ; 
and  whom  upon  the  water  they  sought  to  overwhelm  with 
fearful  storms ;  whom  they  suffered  not  to  be  alone  in  the 
wilderness,  but  vexed  and  harassed  continually,  to  the  utmost 
bounds  of  their  cunning  and  malignity.  This,  the  region  of 
persecutions  of  men,  I  reckon  to  be  likewise  an  inferior  region 
of  trouble  and  temptation  to  the  region  of  sin  in  the  flesh  ; 
because  from  men  we  can  escape,  but  from  ourselves  we  can 
never  escape.  The  law  of  the  flesh,  by  which  human  nature 
is  commanded  on  all  sides,  is  ever  present,  ever  felt,  ever 
hateful,  and  ever  oppressive  to  the  spiritual  life :  for  the  two 
are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  and  can  never  be  recon- 
ciled. The  natural  man  is  never  converted ;  he  is  restrained, 
but  never  willingly  yieldeth.  Sin  is  his  natural  element,  and 
death  his  natural  consummation.  Satan  is  his  lord,  and  he 
is  Satan's  servant.  And  though  the  human  nature  of  Christ 
never  sinned,  there  can  be  no  doubt  it  lay  as  open  to  the 
assaults  of  the  enemy  as  the  human  nature  of  any  man,  foras- 
much as  it  was  the  field  of  controversy  between  the  powers 
of  darkness  and  the  power  of  the  Son  of  God.  And  it  was 
an  open  field,  in  which  they  might  muster  all  their  powers 
against  the  Divine  nature,  in  the  almightiness  of  which  He 
baffled  and  beat  them  at  every  point.  Whereby  they  were 
driven  out  of  the  region  of  flesh  or  humanity,  and  are  rightful 
lords  of  it  no  longer  :  but  Christ  became  from  thenceforward 
its  Lord,  to  bestow  repentance  and  remission  of  sins,  regene- 
ration and  eternal  life,  upon  every  one  who  believeth.  This 
openness  to  every  temptation  arising  out  of  His  manhood,  I 
have  placed  as  the  second  region  of  the  sore  experience  of 
the  Son  of  man. 

And  now  for  the  third,  which  consisteth  in  the  contradic- 
tions of  sinful  men.  Though  it  be  inferior  to  either  of  the 
two  preceding,  it  is  by  no  means  of  small  account.     Which  is 


2 So  THE  INCARNATION: 

not  to  be  measured  by  the  conspiracies  and  combinations 
that  were  framed  against  Him  ;  nor  by  the  contempt  and 
contumely  with  which  they  treated  Him  ;  nor  by  the  gins 
and  snares  which  they  laid  for  Him  on  every  side :  nor  by 
the  cruel  mockings  and  scourgings,  the  contempt  of  all  forms 
of  justice,  the  smiting,  the  spitting  upon  Him,  the  crown  of 
thorns,  the  living  tortures  of  the  cross,  the  article  of  death, 
and  whatever  else  of  outward  cruelty  the  Man  of  Sorrows 
underwent.  But  in  order  to  measure  the  painfulness  of  His 
being  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  you  must  enter  into  His 
love,  the  intense  and  immeasurable  love,  which  He  bore  to 
men.  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  but  his  own  received  him 
not."  "  His  delight  had  been  of  old  with  the  children  of  men, 
even  from  everlasting."  For  them  He  had  been  sacrificed 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  and  for  them  He  had  now 
laid  aside  the  mantle  of  His  uncreated  and  incommunicable 
glory,  and  taken  on  the  veils  of  flesh  ;  clothed  Himself  in  the 
likeness  of  man ;  entered  the  charmed  region,  which  the 
curse  of  God  did  over-canopy,  and  which  Satan  had  filled 
with  his  damned  influences — all  for  love  of  man,  all  to  re- 
deem the  sons  of  men,  and  introduce  them  into  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  Know  ye  the  bitterness  of  a 
wound  from  those  you  love,  from  those  whom  you  have  much 
loved  and  painfully  served  .''  When  the  most  generous  and 
brave  of  those  heathens  who  have  been  surnamed  Great,  was 
defending  himself  from  the  many  daggers  of  those  who  had 
conspired  against  him,  his  friend,  his  most  beloved  friend, 
also  stepped  forward  to  deal  him  a  wound  amongst  the  rest : 
whereupon  the  conqueror  of  the  Romans  had  no  more  courage 
left  in  him  :  the  sorrow  of  wounded  love  being  sorer  far  than 
many  daggers'  points ;  but  faintly  said,  "  And  thou  too, 
Brutus!"  and  dropped  his  arm,  and  gathered  up  his  mantle, 
and  resigned  himself  to  his  enemies.  But  the  Son  of  man, 
who  is  also  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ;  He  who  spake  to  Moses 
out  of  the  bush,  and  by  His  outstretched  arm  delivered  the 
people  out  of  the  house  of  bondage,  and  preserved  them  in  a 
thousand  perils  ;  who  had  espoused  them  to  Him  as  a  wife  of 
youth,  and  loved  them  with  an  everlasting  love ;  as  it  is 
written,  "  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,  fluttereth  over  her 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT. 


281 


young,  spreadeth  abroad  her  wings,  taketh  them,  bcarcth 
them  on  her  wings ;  so  the  Lord  alone  did  lead  him,  and 
there  was  no  strange  god  with  him.  He  made  him  to  ride 
on  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  that  he  might  eat  the  increase 
of  the  fields ;  and  he  made  him  to  suck  honey  out  of  the 
rock,  and  oil  out  of  the  flinty  rock  ;  butter  of  kine,  and  milk 
of  sheep  with  fat  of  lambs  ;  and  rams  of  the  breed  of  Bashan, 
and  goats ;  with  the  fat  of  kidneys  of  wheat :  and  thou  didst 
drink  the  pure  blood  of  the  grape."  To  be  rejected  by  that 
people,  over  whom  He  had  watched  since  the  days  of  Abra- 
ham ;  warning  them,  rising  up  early  and  warning  them  by 
His  prophets  ;  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  being 
unto  them  a  God ;  bearing  with  them  in  all  their  back- 
slidings ;  restoring  them  in  all  their  captivities  and  oppres- 
sions ;  and  now  at  length  passing  all  bounds  and  dimensions 
of  love,  in  coming  to  them  Himself,  to  see  whether,  by  His 
own  prophetic  voice.  He  might  not  be  able  to  ward  off  the 
fierce  wrath  of  God ;  and  whether,  by  His  own  sacrifice 
for  the  nation.  He  might  not  be  able  to  deliver  the  nation 
out  of  the  wretched  captivity  of  sin  and  of  the  world  under 
which  it  groaned — oh !  when  coming  on  such  an  errand  of 
love,  to  those  whom  He  had  so  long,  whom  He  had  so  ten- 
derly loved  ;  to  be  rejected,  to  be  set  at  nought  ;  to  be  denied 
as  a  stranger,  and  reputed  of  as  an  impostor ;  to  be  less  es- 
teemed than  a  thief  and  a  murderer,  whom  they  desired  to  be 
given  to  them,  when  they  vehemently  cried  out  against  the 
Son  of  God,  "Crucify  him,  crucify  him!"  what  an  affliction, 
what  an  ocean  of  sorrow,  is  there  here !  I  speak  not  of  His 
being  their  Creator  and  Preserver,  which  He  is  to  all  men :  I 
speak  of  His  being  their  Father;  I  speak  of  His  having  given 
them  that  land  of  milk  and  honey,  and  builded  them  that 
proud  city,  and  holy  temple  which  His  glory  filled :  they 
were  indeed  His  own.  His  own  by  a  thousand  claims :  and 
thus  to  be  rejected  of  them  !  what  a  wound,  what  a  sorrow  ! 
Surely  no  sorrow  was  like  unto  this  sorrow.  Our  master  poet 
hath  well  portrayed  an  old  father's  sorrow  on  being  rejected 
by  his  daughters,  amongst  whom  he  had  shared  his  kingdom. 
Such  a  delineation  as  he  hath  given  may  somewhat  help  us 
to  this  conception,  but  to  attain  unto  the  conception  nothing 


2  82  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

availeth.  Perhaps  the  best  way  is  to  hear  it  in  His  own 
words.  As  He  drew  nigh  Jerusalem,  He  sat  down  on  a  hill, 
and  looked  upon  it  and  wept.  When  He  was  pronouncing  the 
doom  of  the  Pharisees,  and  Sadducees,  and  Scribes,  who  had 
made  the  people  to  wander,  His  words  were  like  a  two-edged 
sword  ;  but  when  He  cometh  to  speak  of  Jerusalem  and  her 
children,  His  words  are  like  the  words  of  a  mother,  melting 
over  her  wayward  child,  whom  she  would  die  to  reclaim : 
"O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest  the  prophets, 
and  stonest  them  that  are  sent  unto  thee,  how  oft  would  I 
have  gathered  thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth 
her  chickens  under  her  wings,  but  ye  would  not!  Behold,  your 
house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  And  again,  as  He  pro- 
ceedeth  to  Calvary  to  be  offered  up,  groaning  under  the  load 
of  His  cross,  and  was  lamented  of  the  women  who  followed 
after  Him,  He  said  with  tenderness,  "  Weep  not  for  me,  O  ye 
daughters  of  Jerusalem;  but  weep  for  yourselves  and  for  your 
children  :  for,  behold,  the  days  are  coming  in  the  which  they 
shall  say,  Blessed  are  the  barren,  and  the  womb  that  never 
bare,  and  the  paps  which  never  gave  suck." 

But  the  greatest  insight  into  the  humiliation  and  sufferings 
of  the  Son  of  man,  is  to  be  got  from  the  Book  of  Psalms.  In 
the  22d  Psalm  He  sets  Himself  into  contrast  with  all  God's 
former  messengers,  and  thus  bewaileth  His  case,  most  cala- 
mitous of  all: — "Our  fathers  trusted  in  thee:  they  trusted, 
and  thou  didst  deliver  them.  They  cried  unto  thee,  and  were 
delivered  ;  they  trusted  in  thee,  and  were  not  confounded. 
But  I  am  a  worm,  and  no  man :  a  reproach  of  men,  and  de- 
spised of  the  people.  All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to 
scorn  ;  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head,  saying. 
He  trusted  in  the  Lord,  that  he  would  deliver  him  :  let  him 
deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighted  in  him.  .  .  .  There  is  none 
to  help.  Many  bulls  have  compassed  me :  strong  bulls  of 
Bashan  have  beset  me  round.  They  gaped  upon  me  with 
their  mouths,  as  a  ravening  and  a  roaring  lion.  .  .  .  Dogs 
have  compassed  me  about :  the  assembly  of  the  wicked 
have  enclosed  me:  they  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet." 
These  passages  shew  how,  like  one  that  is  good  and  ten- 
der-hearted. He  keenly  felt  the  reproaches  of  His  brethren  : 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  28 


J 


having  none  of  that  stoical  indifference  to  human  approbation 
which  Cometh  of  pride ;  nor  of  that  malicious  spirit  which 
retorteth  abusive  treatment  with  sovereign  contempt.  Ah  ! 
these  stoical  and  vengeful  tones  of  the  mind  hold  not  of  affec- 
tion and  love,  but  of  spite  and  hatred.  Jesus  loved  men  too 
much  not  to  be  grieved  with  the  indifference  or  hatred  of  the 
meanest  man.  Now,  to  shew  how  much  it  afflicted  Him,  let 
me  further  quote  from  the  38th  Psalm  :  "  My  lovers  and  my 
friends  stand  aloof  from  my  sore  ;  and  my  kinsmen  stand  afar 
ofT.  They  also  that  seek  after  my  life  lay  snares  for  me  :  and 
they  that  seek  my  hurt  speak  mischievous  things,  and  imagine 
deceits  all  the  day  long.  But  I,  as  a  deaf  man  heard  not ; 
and  I  was  as  a  dumb  man,  that  opcneth  not  his  mouth.  Thus 
I  was  as  a  man  that  heareth  not,  and  in  whose  mouth  are  no 
reproofs."  Again,  "  Thou  hast  known  my  reproach,  and  my 
shame,  and  my  dishonour  :  mine  adversaries  are  all  before 
thee.  Reproach  hath  broken  my  heart,  and  I  am  full  of 
heaviness :  and  I  looked  for  some  to  take  pity,  and  for  com- 
forters, but  found  none."  What  a  craving  after  love  and 
fellowship!  what  a  longing  after  consolation  !  what  a  yearning 
after  kindness !  Oh,  my  brethren,  our  iniquity,  our  hard- 
hearted iniquity,  our  pride,  our  selfishness,  hinder  us  from 
entering  into  the  fellow-feeling  of  our  Lord's  trials  and  afflic- 
tions from  false  brethren.  This  tenderness  of  affection  He 
beautifully  expresseth  in  the  35th  Psalm:  "False  witnesses 
did  rise  up :  they  laid  to  my  charge  things  that  I  knew  not. 
They  rewarded  me  evil  for  good,  to  the  spoiling  of  my  soul. 
But  as  for  me,  when  they  were  sick  my  clothing  was  sack- 
cloth :  I  humbled  my  soul  with  fasting,  and  my  prayer  re- 
turned into  mine  own  bosom.  I  behaved  myself  as  though 
he  had  been  my  friend  or  brother.  I  bowed  down  heavily,  as 
one  that  mourneth  for  his  mother." 

It  is  with  great  struggles  and  strainings  of  spirit  that  I  can 
get  down  into  the  depth  of  the  Lord's  suffering  and  humili- 
ation, and  I  feel  how  utterly  inadequate  is  anything  which  I 
have  said  to  express  the  thousandth  part  of  it.  And  I  must 
again  refer  you  to  the  Psalms,  of  which  a  great  number,  I 
might  almost  say  a  fifth  part,  respect  this  subject.  There  is, 
however,  another  method  by  which  I  have  sought  to  come  at 


284  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

the  conception  of  this  matter,  which  I  must  just  glance  at 
before  closing  this  head  of  my  discourse.  It  is,  by  studying 
the  history  of  the  Jewish  people  after  He  had  condescended 
to  be  present  with  them  in  a  manifest  manner.  From  this  we 
shall  obtain  an  idea  how  He  abhorreth  the  neighbourhood  of 
sin,  and  punisheth  its  presence  in  the  midst  of  those  with 
whom  He  is  dwelling.  When  He  entered  into  covenant  with 
the  people  at  the  rock  of  Sinai,  they  had  to  sanctify  them- 
selves for  three  days,  and  wash  their  outmost  garments,  in 
order  to  appear  before  the  Lord  in  all  outward  as  well  as 
inward  purity.  When  they  had  defiled  themselves  with  the 
abomination  of  the  golden  calf,  the  Lord  entreated  Moses  to 
be  permitted  to  consume  them  at  one  blow ;  and  was  not 
appeased  until  the  sons  of  Levi  had  appeased  His  wrath 
by  girding  every  man  his  sword  upon  his  thigh,  and  execut- 
ing the  vengeance  of  the  Lord,  sparing  neither  companion,  nor 
brother,  nor  father,  nor  mother,  until  there  fell  of  the  people 
that  day  about  three  thousand  men.  Again,  when  the  people 
murmured  and  rebelled  against  the  Lord,  because  He  fed 
them  only  with  manna,  angels'  food,  and  desired  flesh  to  eat, 
such  as  they  had  eaten  in  the  house  of  their  bondage ;  the 
Lord  gave  them  their  heart's  desire  :  but  while  the  flesh  was 
yet  between  their  teeth,  ere  it  was  chewed,  the  wrath  of  the 
Lord  was  kindled  against  the  people,  and  the  Lord  smote 
the  people  with  a  very  great  slaughter.  And  when  Miriam 
stood  up  against  the  authority  of  Moses,  she  became  a  leper 
white  as  snow,  and  was  banished  from  the  camp  for  seven 
days.  Now  Moses  was  but  a  servant  over  Christ's  house, 
who  Himself  is  Son  and  Heir.  And  when  Core,  Dathan, 
and  Abiram,  with  their  company,  stood  up  against  that  same 
servant  of  the  Son  of  man,  the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and 
swallowed  them  quick ;  and  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men, 
who  did  offer  incense  in  defiance  of  the  Lord's  ordinance, 
were  consumed  with  fire  that  came  out  from  the  Lord :  and 
so  enraged  was  the  Lord  with  this  spirit  of  insubordination, 
that  there  died  that  day,  in  the  plague,  fourteen  thousand 
seven  hundred  men  :  and  the  Lord  was  scarcely  restrained 
from  consuming  them  wholly.  And  why  need  I  speak  of  the 
fiery  flying  serpents,  or  of  the  abomination  of  the  daughters 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  A  ND  ACT.  285 

of  Moab,  or  of  the  sin  of  Achan,  and  of  the  thousands  and 
the  tens  of  thousands  which  the  Lord  cut  off  in  each  of  these 
acts  of  disobedience  ?  Or  why  need  I  speak  of  the  evil  report 
of  the  spies,  and  the  rebelHon  against  the  Lord  which  ensued 
on  that  day  of  provocation,  and  for  which  a  whole  generation 
was  eaten  up  by  forty  years'  slow  and  wearisome  consump- 
tion ?  All  these  things  are  written  in  order  to  teach  us  what 
a  fearful  and  fiery  indignation  the  Lord  hath  against  sin ; 
what  holiness  He  requireth  of  those  in  the  midst  of  whom 
He  dwelleth ;  with  what  carelessness  of  human  life  He  as- 
serteth  His  own  holiness  ;  and  how,  when  He  is  angry,  thou- 
sands and  tens  of  thousands  are  not  sufficient  for  a  peace- 
offering.  Yet  behold  this  very  Son  of  God,  who  dwelt  be- 
tween the  cherubim,  and  from  whose  fiery  presence  these 
executive  ministers  of  flaming  destruction  proceeded  forth  ; 
behold  Him,  who  was  so  jealous  of  His  holiness  that  He 
spared  no  life,  nor  withheld  Himself  from  any  judgment,  so 
that  He  might  preserve  His  holiness  unoffended ;  Him,  I  say, 
behold  as  the  Son  of  man,  dwelling  among  the  sinfullest 
people,  the  most  hypocritical  people,  a  generation  of  vipers, 
an  adulterous  race,  whose  very  priests,  for  conscious  guilt, 
could  not  take  up  a  stone  to  cast  at  the  adulterous  woman — 
in  the  midst,  I  say,  of  such  a  generation,  behold  the  same  Holy 
One  of  Sinai  and  of  the  cherubim  dwelling  in  flesh,  and  sub- 
mitting to  the  presence,  and  knowledge,  and  temptation  of 
all  possible  iniquity  !  Him,  the  same  who  could  never,  who 
did  never,  no,  nor  never  can,  look  upon  sin  but  with  detesta- 
tion and  abhorrence,  behold  numbered  with  transgressors, 
and  dwelling  with  publicans  and  sinners,  living  with  hypo- 
critical Pharisees,  and  bearing  the  taunts  of  infidel  Saddu- 
cees.  Set  these  two  things  into  contrast, — the  holiness  of 
His  indignation  against  sin  while  He  abode  only  in  a  visible 
glory,  and  the  patience  of  sin  while  He  was  the  Son  of  man  ; 
the  destruction  of  sinners  from  the  midst  of  His  Church  be- 
fore He  became  incarnate,  and  the  pains-taking  patience  with 
sinners  while  He  was  incarnate, — and  you  may  have  some 
idea  both  of  the  greatness  of  His  love,  and  of  the  restraining 
of  His  Divine  wrath,  and  of  the  painfulness  of  the  contradic- 
tion which   He  continued  to  bear  while  He  tabernacled  in 


286  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

the  flesh.     For  once  mercy  and  truth  did  meet  together,  for 
once  righteousness  and  peace  did  kiss  each  other. 


PART   II. 

But  there  is  yet  another  scene  of  humiliation,  beyond  the 
portals  of  life,  and  therefore  beyond  the  sight  of  mortals,  and 
somewhat  beyond  their  conception ;  yet  not  beyond  the  re- 
velation and  delineation  of  Holy  Writ,  and  therefore  not  be- 
yond the  faith  and  feeling  of  the  believer — I  mean,  that  of 
the  intermediate  state,  into  which  the  Son  of  man  passed 
with  these  memorable  words  on  His  lips,  "  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ! " — This  is  the  second  head  of 
method. 

Besides,  and  beyond,  those  three  views  of  the  Son  of  man's 
humiliation  which  I  have  already  opened,  there  is  another 
and  a  more  mysterious  one,  beginning  with  the  hidings  of 
His  Father's  countenance,  and  consummated  within  the  veil 
of  death,  into  which  I  would  now  reverently  inquire,  in  order 
that  you  may  see  the  depth,  the  profound  depth  of  that 
abasement  into  which  He  descended  for  the  great  ends  of 
His  Father's  glory  ;  and  so  perceive  the  full  meaning  of  the 
ejaculation  with  which  His  wonderful  discourse  to  His  dis- 
ciples commenceth :  "  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,  and 
God  is  glorified  in  him  :  if  God  be  glorified  in  him,  God 
shall  also  glorify  him  in  himself,  and  shall  straightway  glorify 
him." 

The  awful  and  woful  words  which  He  uttered  with  a  loud 
and  piercing  voice  immediately  before  He  yielded  up  the 
ghost,  after  He  had  hung  upon  the  cross  for  three  hours, 
while  there  was  darkness  over  the  whole  land,  emblematical 
of  the  inward  darkness,  the  hour  and  power  of  spiritual  dark- 
ness, which  overspread  the  Redeemer  of  the  world — these 
words,  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabacthani .''  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  .'' "  recorded  both  by  Matthew 
and  Mark,  are  at  once  the  evidence  of  the  fact  that  He  was 
forsaken  of  His  Father,  and  furnish  us  with  a  clue  for  prose- 
cuting our  inquiry  into  the  cause  of  so  very  mysterious  a  dis- 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  287 

pensation.  That  these  words  contain  an  exact  delineation 
of  His  spirit's  exhaustion  of  all  comfort,  and  desertion  of  all 
Divine  strength  and  countenance  ;  and  were  not  merely,  as  I 
have  heard  it  alleged,  an  appropriation  to  Himself  of  the  226. 
Psalm,  whereof  they  are  the  commencement,  in  order  to  re- 
move dismay  and  doubt,  or  disbelief,  from  the  minds  of  His 
disciples  who  might  then  be  present,  by  shewing  them  that 
this  fearful  accumulation  of  ills  had  been  all  foreseen  and 
foretold  of  Messiah  by  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  is  manifest  from 
every  consideration  ;  first,  for  that  it  is  said  He  uttered  them, 
or  cried  them  out,  with  a  loud  voice,  as  if  extorted  from  Him 
by  the  greatness  of  this  agony  beyond  all  endurance,  and  the 
mystery  of  this  abandonment  beyond  all  anticipation.  How 
great  His  desolation  was,  and  in  what  utter  desertion  and  entire 
helplessness  He  was  left,  is  to  my  sympathy  even  more  clearly 
shewn  by  the  words  which,  after  a  short  interval.  He  added,  and 
which  He  cried  also  with  a  loud  voice,  "Father,  into  thy  hands  I 
commend  my  spirit:"  which,  coming  from  the  mouth  of  the  only- 
begotten  Son  ofGod,  who  united  the  Divine  nature  to  the  human, 
do  shew  me  not  only  the  Divinity  eclipsed  of  all  its  power  and 
glory,  but  brought,  if  I  might  so  speak,  to  the  last  ebb  of 
human  weakness  ;  when  faith  is  barely  able  to  bear  up,  yet 
doth  bear  up  ;  when  the  soul,  swept  away  by  the  main  stream 
from  all  its  rests  and  anchors,  and  beholding  the  yawning 
gulf  beyond,  is  able  to  contend  no  longer,  but  hath  yet  the 
passive  courage  of  faith  to  say,  "  Into  thy  hands,  O  Father,  I 
commit  my  spirit."  If  the  Lord,  as  they  suppose,  had  spoken 
these  words  merely  for  the  ear  of  His  disciples  who  were  then 
present,  and  not  out  of  the  anguish  of  His  desolate  soul.  He 
needed  not  to  have  uttered  them  with  a  loud  voice ;  for  we 
are  told  that  His  mother  and  the  beloved  disciple,  to  whom 
He  spake  some  words  of  consolation,  stood,  along  with  cer- 
tain other  disciples,  beside  the  cross.  Neither  is  it  said,  in 
that,  or  in  the  other  dialogue  which  He  held  with  the  thief, 
or  in  the  request  which  He  made  for  something  to  allay  His 
thirst,  that  He  spake  with  a  loud  voice :  only  in  these  two 
last  recorded  acts  of  His  incarnate  life — "  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me.''"  "Father,  into  thy  hands  I 
commend  my  spirit," — is  it  said  that  He  cried  aloud,  as  it  were. 


288  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

not  for  the  hearing  of  men,  but  for  the  distant,  the  far  distant, 
the  far  withdrawn  ear  of  God.  Besides,  granting  that  these 
words  were  spoken  for  the  ear  of  His  disciples,  and  towards 
their  consolation,  it  doth  not  the  less,  but  as  seemeth  to  me 
somewhat  the  more,  establish  the  truth,  that  this  was  the  true 
case  and  condition  of  His  soul.  For  it  gave  them,  and  it 
giveth  us,  to  understand  that  the  whole  of  the  twenty-second 
Psalm  is  to  be  interpreted  as  descriptive  of  the  scene  of  misery 
and  horror  upon  which  they  were  looking  :  now  that  Psalm, 
when  it  is  examined,  doth  delineate  such  an  utter  desolation 
of  soul,  such  a  horror  of  great  darkness,  as  is  nowhere  written 
in  the  Holy  Scriptures;  being  the  best  commentary  upon  these 
words,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  .''"  with 
which  it  openeth  its  burden  ;  and  having  been  used  as  such 
by  all  who  have  sought  to  search  into  the  sufferings  of  the 
Lord.  In  deed  and  in  truth  I  believe  that  our  Lord  spoke 
the  first  words  of  that  psalm,  because  He  had  just  finished 
with  enduring  all  the  anguish  and  sorrows  of  hell,  which  are 
there  and  elsewhere  written  by  the  Holy  Spirit  concerning 
Him.  They  had  parted  His  garments  among  them,  and  cast 
lots  upon  His  vesture  :  they  had  pierced  His  hands  and  His 
feet :  in  His  thirst  they  had  given  Him  vinegar  to  drink.  It 
was  finished :  all  the  things  which  had  been  written  of  His 
sufferings  were  accomplished.  And,  that  it  might  be  manifest 
unto  all  men  from  whence  proceeded  their  power  to  do  so, 
and  of  what  spiritual  wickednesses  in  high  places  they  were 
but  the  tools  ;  that  it  might  be  known  unto  the  Church  and 
unto  the  world,  that  these  were  but  the  outward  signs  of  an- 
other and  more  terrible  distress,  which  in  spirit  He  was 
undergoing,  while  He  bore  the  outward  without  any  murmur 
or  complaint,  He  crieth  out  with  inward  anguish,  "  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  .■"'  And  that  it  might 
be  known  that  it  was  a  spiritual  desertion  He  complained  of, 
He  addeth,  in  the  same  extreme  agony  of  utterance,  as  speak- 
ing unto  one  that  had  removed  himself  afar  off,  "  Father,  into 
thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

A  few  hours  before,  even  after  the  agony  of  the  Garden, 
He  had  said,  "  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  my 
Father,  and  he  shall  presently  give  me  more  than  twelve 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  2  89 

legions  of  angels?"  but  now  He  is  utterly  forsaken  of  Ills 
Father :  He  hath  passed  into  a  deeper  agony  and  abysm  of 
grief  than  that  of  the  Garden.  No  angel  to  strengthen  Him 
appeareth ;  no  word  to  comfort  Him.  The  light  of  heaven 
hidden  from  His  eyes;  the  sympathy  of  men  denied  unto 
His  soul ;  and  the  countenance  of  His  Father  withdrawn 
from  His  spirit.  All  this  done  in  the  green  tree;  in  One 
who  had  never  sinned  nor  offended ;  who  had  been  glorified 
with  the  Father  before  the  world  was,  and  was  about  to  be 
glorified  again  with  that  same  glory — thus  deserted  in  His 
extremity ;  thus  laden,  almost  beyond  Divine  endurance — 
what  shall  we  say  of  this,  but  that  it  is  passing  wonderful ! 
the  mystery  of  mysteries  !  most  devoutly  and  most  reverently 
to  be  inquired  into,  as  the  deepest  and  most  comprehensive 
of  all  God's  works  and  doings  upon  the  earth ! 

From  every  other  trial  and  temptation  of  the  powers  of 
darkness  the  Lord  came  off  triumphant ;  and  from  this  also 
He  arose  triumphant ;  but  after  how  different  a  conflict !  In 
the  Wilderness  the  tempter  had  power  to  put  Him  under 
the  three  extremest  trials  of  humanit}^ — to  exhaust  the  foun- 
tain of  His  natural  life  with  extenuating  hunger;  to  fill  His 
eye  with  the  universal  glory  of  this  world's  kingdom,  and 
press  it  in  upon  His  soul  with  all  cunning  craftiness  and 
diabolical  seduction ;  and  to  spread  before  His  eyes  the  delu- 
sion and  sophistry  of  an  angel  of  light ; — but  out  of  all  these 
He  came  unblemished  and  unhurt.  Again,  in  His  public 
ministry  Satan  tracked  His  steps  like  the  bloodhound,  and 
waylaid  Him  on  every  side,  and  armed  against  Him  the 
hands  of  murderous  men  ;  but  was  ever  baffled  and  over- 
thrown, because  God  was  with  Him  :  the  divinity  still  shone 
in  Him,  like  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  repelling  and  scatter- 
ing the  darkness  as  it  arose.  Also,  before  the  scene  of  the 
Supper,  Avhen  His  soul  was  sorely  oppressed  with  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  this  hour,  the  Father  upheld  Him  with  a  voice 
from  heaven.  And  in  the  Garden,  when  He  endured  a  huge 
affliction  and  mighty  overwhelming  of  soul,  an  angel  came 
and  comforted  Him :  and  though  the  greatness  of  that  agony 
did  enforce  the  stream  of  life  out  of  its  course,  and  press  it 
through  the  pores  of  His  skin  upon  the  earth  thirsting  for 
VOL.  V.  T 


290  THE  INCARNA  TION: 

that  baptism  of  redeeming  blood  ;  yet  out  of  all  these  trials 
He  came  unharmed  and  victorious.  But  now  Satan  hath 
combined  such  a  power  against  Him  on  the  cross,  that  he 
prevaileth  to  the  extinction  of  life  ;  to  the  separation  of  body 
and  spirit ;  to  the  burial  of  His  body  in  the  earth,  and  its 
retention  for  three  days  in  the  prison  of  the  tomb ;  to  the 
drawing  down  of  His  soul  into  hell,  or  the  abode  of  separate 
spirits,  and  its  retention  there  for  the  same  mysterious  season 
— in  which,  no  doubt,  the  Scripture  was  fulfilled,  and  death 
and  hell  defeated,  and  he  that  had  the  power  of  them  de- 
stroyed ;  yet,  nevertheless,  in  which  was  manifested  the  sur- 
passing horror  of  this  last  conflict  over  every  other  in  which 
the  Prince  of  Life  and  prince  of  darkness  were  engaged.  For, 
brethren,  there  was  no  more  necessity  that  the  body  of  the  Son 
of  God  should  descend  into  the  grave,  and  His  soul  into  hell, 
than  that  He  should  condescend  to  take  a  body  and  tabernacle 
in  clay :  the  one  was  as  much  a  wilful  and  willing  act  as  the 
other :  He  owed  death  as  little  as  He  owed  the  flesh ;  He 
owed  the  grave  as  little  as  He  owed  the  world :  both  were 
acts  voluntary,  yet  needful  to  be  undergone,  in  order  to  de- 
stroy the  activity  and  power  of  evil,  and  the  prince  of  dark- 
ness :  and  both  of  them  are  measures  of  that  power  which 
the  evil  prince  was  able  to  bring  against  the  Son  of  God 
when  He  had  become  the  surety  for  fallen  man :  and  as  such 
I  offer  them  to  your  ear :  not  as  if  we  could  thereby  form  an 
actual  estimate  of  the  greatness  of  the  spiritual  condescen- 
sion, but  a  comparative  estimate  of  the  various  parts  thereof. 
And  I  say,  that  by  how  much  more  terrible  were  the  conse- 
quences of  the  controversy  upon  the  cross  than  the  conse- 
quences of  the  controversy  in  the  wilderness,  or  in  the  Gar- 
den, and  in  all  the  weary  life  between ;  by  so  much  more 
mighty  was  the  power  of  opposition  which  then  was  brought 
against  Him,  and  the  strength  of  trial  with  which  He  was 
tried,  the  desolateness  in  which  He  was  left,  and  the  horror 
of  great  darkness  which  came  over  Him.  My  Lord's  body  in 
the  tomb — my  Lord's  spirit  in  hell — are  to  me  at  once  the 
explanation  of  the  meaning,  and  the  assurance  of  the  truth  of 
these  words,  "My  God,  my  God,  Avhy  hast  thou  forsaken 
me!" 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  291 

Brethren,  did  you  ever  meditate  that  expression  of  Peter's, 
which  he  spake  by  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost ; 
"  Whom  God  hath  raised  up,  having  loosed  the  pains  (the 
travail-pangs)  of  death,  because  it  was  not  possible  that  he 
should  be  holden  of  it?"  To  me  they  open  a  great  deep,  in 
the  coasting  of  which  I  find  little  help  or  guidance  from  our 
clear-headed  Protestant  divines,  but  not  a  little  from  many  of 
the  fathers  of  the  primitive  and  some  of  the  mystics  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church.  When  I  turn  to  the  11 6th  Psalm, 
from  which  the  expression,  "  the  travail-pangs  of  death,"  is 
taken,  I  find  it  thus  written,  "  the  sorrows  " — (in  the  Septua- 
gint,  which  the  Lord  and  the  apostles  for  the  most  part  used, 
it  is  "  the  travail-pangs  of  death,"  the  same  form  of  words 
which  Peter  useth) — "  the  travail-pangs  of  death  compassed 
me,  the  pangs  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  me :  I  found  trouble  and 
sorrow :  then  called  I  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord ;  O  Lord,  I 
beseech  thee  deliver  my  soul;"  and  so  on,  throughout  the 
whole  of  that  psalm,  which  casts  much  light  upon  the  state 
of  the  Lord's  soul  between  death  and  the  resurrection.  And 
yet  methinks  it  helpeth  me  a  little  more  to  apprehend  the 
deep  mystery  of  these  travail-pangs  of  death  and  straits  of 
hell,  from  which  He  was  loosed  by  the  resurrection,  to  witness 
the  joy  expressed  in  the  i6th  Psalm,  that  He  should  not  be 
left  under  their  dominion :  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always 
before  me  :  because  he  is  at  my  right  hand  I  shall  not  be 
moved  :  therefore  my  heart  is  glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiceth  : 
my  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope ;  for  thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see 
corruption."  The  prospect  of  the  resurrection  maketh  His 
heart  glad,  and  every  hope  of  glory  to  awake  and  rejoice 
within  Him ;  first  of  all,  because  the  low,  and  loathsome,  and 
narrow  straits  of  death  and  hell  He  should  speedily  be  deli- 
vered from,  on  account  of  His  piety  and  blamelessness :  then 
follows  His  restoration  to  life — that  is,  the  resurrection,  and 
ascension  unto  glory — as  the  second  ground  which  He  had 
of  gladness:  "Thou  wilt  shew  me  the  path  of  life:  in  thy 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy :  at  thy  right  hand  there  are  plea- 
sures for  evermore."  From  this  psalm  I  certainly  conclude 
that  there  Avas  a  far  greater  humiliation  and  horror  in  the 


292  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

condition  by  which  the  Lord  passed  by  death  than  in  the  con- 
dition into  which  He  came  by  birth ;  that  the  travail-pangs 
of  His  mother  prognosticated  nothing  Hke  so  painful  a  being 
to  the  holy  child  Jesus  as  the  travail-pangs  of  the  cross  did 
to  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  by  that  passage  descended  into 
death  and  hell. 

In  addition  to  the  light  which  is  cast  upon  this  great  mys- 
tery from  these  two  psalms,  and  others  of  the  like  strain,  I 
find  a  great  door  of  meditation  opened  by  these  words  of 
Paul  in  the  5th  chapter  of  the  Hebrews ;  indeed,  so  strong 
and  so  steady  a  light  as  wholly  to  clear  it  from  all  ambiguity 
and  doubt:  "Who  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  when  he  had 
offered  up  prayers  and  supplications,  with  strong  cryings  and 
tears,  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death,  and 
was  heard  in  that  he  feared  ;  though  he  were  a  Son,  yet 
learned  he  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered ;  and 
being  made  perfect,  he  became  the  author  of  eternal  salva- 
tion unto  all  them  that  obey  him."  Here  the  holy  apostle 
declareth  that  the  great  anxiety  and  burden  of  Christ's  soul, 
during  the  days  of  His  flesh,  was  His  death  ;  and  that  the 
great  burden  of  His  prayers  and  His  supplications  was  to  be 
delivered  from  it ;  and  that  He  was  heard  because  He  feared, 
or,  as  it  is  in  the  psalm  quoted  above,  because  He  set  the 
Lord  continually  before  His  face. 

To  this  do  well  agree  various  passages  of  His  life.  When 
Moses  and  Elias  appeared  with  Him  on  Mount  Tabor,  the 
subject  on  which  they  discoursed  was  the  "death  which  He 
should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."  Oft  He  broke  the  subject 
to  His  disciples,  as  that  which  lay  nearest  to  His  heart ;  but 
their  dulness  of  hearing,  their  hardness  of  faith,  and  utter  re- 
jection of  the  thought,  barred  their  souls  to  all  such  com- 
munications :  at  which  our  Lord  was  so  grievously  offended 
upon  one  occasion,  that  with  unusual  warmth  He  said  unto 
Peter,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,  for  thou  savourest  the 
things  of  the  earth,  and  not  the  things  which  be  of  God." 
But  as  the  time  drew  nigh,  nothing  could  hinder  the  bigness 
of  His  grief  from  heaving  and  swelling  forth  certain  ejacula- 
tions ;  as  upon  the  occasion  recorded  in  the  preceding  chap- 
ter, when  He  said,  "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled  ;    and  what 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  293 

shall  I  say?  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour;"  and  at  the 
Supper,  when  "  He  was  troubled  in  spirit,  and  said,  One  of 
you  shall  betray  me ;"  and  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane, 
when  He  three  times  prayed  that  the  cup  might  pass  from 
Him  ;  and  upon  the  occasion  of  His  dialogue  with  the  mother 
of  Zebedee's  children,  when  He  said,  "Are  ye  able  to  drink 
of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of,  and  to  be  baptized  with  the 
baptism  that  I  am  baptized  with."  Being,  however,  debarred 
by  the  unbelief  of  men  from  any  human  sympathy  in  this  the 
great  burden  of  His  soul.  He  did  retire  into  secret  places, 
and  into  the  wilderness,  to  pass  whole  nights  in  prayer :  and 
I  have  no  doubt  that,  if  the  solitudes  of  Galilee  and  of 
Mount  Olivet  could  lift  up  a  voice,  they  would  bear  witness 
to  those  prayers,  and  supplications,  and  tears,  and  strong 
cryings,  with  which  Christ  so  earnestly  besought  to  be  deli- 
vered from  death.  And  so  much  doth  the  apostle  Paul  see 
the  humiliation  of  Christ  to  be  concentrated  in  this  one  act  of 
dying,  that  in  a  certain  place  he  giveth  no  other  end  of  the 
incarnation  but  this  one  only,  saying,  "  Jesus,  who  was  made 
a  little  lower  than  the  angels  for  the  suffering  of  death." 

Of  these  tears  and  supplications  we  have,  indeed,  little 
record  in  the  evangelists,  but  the  psalms  are  full  of  them  : 
for  example,  "  I  am  weary  of  my  crying;  my  throat  is  dried, 
mine  eyes  fail,  while  I  wait  for  my  God."  Again,  "  I  have 
eaten  ashes  like  bread,  and  mingled  my  drink  with  weeping  : 
by  reason  of  the  voice  of  my  groaning  my  bones  cleave  to 
my  skin."  Again,  "  My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and 
night."  Again,  "  When  I  wept  and  chastened  my  soul,  that 
also  was  to  my  reproach."  And  so  forth,  throughout  every 
psalm  where  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  manifest  beforehand  the 
sufferings  of  Christ.  Of  all  these  prayers,  supplications,  tears, 
and  strong  cryings,  Paul  declareth  to  us  the  burden  was,  that 
He  might  not  be  given  up  to  death.  And  so  we  find  it  to  be 
declared  in  the  same  pathetic  psalms,  as  in  the  I02d  :  "  He 
weakened  my  strength  in  the  way ;  he  shortened  my  days. 
I  said,  O  my  God,  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my 
days."  And  again,  in  the  6th  Psalm  :  "  Return,  O  Lord,  de- 
liver my  soul ;  O  save  me,  for  thy  mercy's  sake.  For  in  death 
there  is  no  remembrance  of  thee  ;  in  the  grave  who  shall  give 


294  THE  INCARNATION: 

thee  thanks  ?  I  am  weary  with  my  groaning  ;  all  the  night 
do  I  make  my  bed  to  swim  ;  I  water  my  couch  with  my 
tears.  Mine  eye  is  consumed  because  of  grief;  it  waxeth  old 
because  of  all  mine  enemies."  Again  :  "  Mine  eye  mourneth 
by  reason  of  affliction  :  Lord,  I  have  called  daily  upon  thee, 
I  have  stretched  out  my  hands  unto  thee.  Wilt  thou  shew 
wonders  to  the  dead  .-'  shall  the  dead  arise  and  praise  thee  .''" 
These  expressions  of  grief,  the  strongest  which  language  ever 
expressed,  are  almost  always  found  in  connexion  with  deli- 
verance from  death  ;  and  before  the  end  of  the  psalm  the 
deliverance  is  commonly  vouchsafed,  and  the  universal  tri- 
umph of  it  gloriously  set  forth.  Not  that  I  suppose  Paul's 
testimony  needeth  confirmation,  but  that  I  would  shew  how 
common  is  the  consent  of  all  Scripture,  that  the  great  agony 
of  the  Lord's  soul  was,  how  He  might  be  delivered  from  the 
hand  of  death  and  hell :  in  which  there  could  be  no  meaning, 
unless  the  scene  into  which  death  did  pass  Him  on,  were  a 
scene  of  far  greater  trial  than  the  scene  from  which  it  carried 
Him  away.  No  doubt  this,  which  Paul  declareth,  was  the 
common  doctrine  of  the  apostles  ;  and  therefore  it  is  they 
lay  such  a  prodigious  stress  upon  His  resurrection,  that  pillar 
of  their  system,  that  mere  incumbrance  of  ours,  who  neither 
will  nor  can  be  persuaded  to  look  farther  than  the  cross.  But 
the  apostle  Paul  saw  deeper  into  this  mystery,  when,  in  the 
passage  from  which  I  quoted,  he  adds,  that  "  Christ,  though  a 
Son,  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  suffered  ;"  and 
thereby  was  made  perfect  for  the  office  of  the  priesthood  ;  to 
which,  he  had  argued,  it  was  indispensable  that  every  one 
called  thereto  should  have  a  fellow-feeling  with  those  for 
whom  he  offered,  and  compassion  upon  them  which  are  out 
of  the  way,  as  being  himself  compassed  about  with  infirmity. 
This  Christ  not  having  in  Himself,  being  a  Son,  and  no  alien, 
or  enemy,  had,  as  it  were,  to  learn  by  passing  through  the 
afflictions  of  life,  and  the  sorrows  of  death,  and  the  pains  of 
hell  or  the  separate  state ;  until,  having  proved  the  uttermost 
trials  of  those  whom  He  would  redeem,  and  being  risen  from 
them  all,  perfected  for  the  Priesthood,  He  did  become  "  the 
author  of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that  obey  him, 
called  of  God  a  high  priest,  after  the  order  of  Melchizedec." 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  295 

Of  these  words,  therefore,  the  last  which  He  uttered  on  the 
cross,  "My  God,   my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken    me!" 
"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit ;"  I  think  the 
true  key  to  be  this, — That  when  the  swimmings  and  swoonings 
of  real  death  were  ready  to  come  upon  Him  ;  and  He  felt  that 
His  body,  upon  the  resurrection  of  which  depended  the  resur- 
rection of  all  saints  and  the  restoration  of  the  material  world» 
was  ibout  to  descend  into  the  strongholds  of  death  and  cor- 
ruption ;  and  that   His  spirit  was  about  to  descend  naked 
into  :he  place  of  separate  spirits,  and  to  wrestle  with  the 
spiritaal   powers   thereof,   which   were   ready  with   all   their 
migh:  to  oppose  the  going  forth  thence  of  His  soul,  and  the 
souls  of  all  saints ;  He  was  moved,  yea,  and  overwhelmed 
with  the  power  which  death  and  the  grave  were  mustering 
ag^ainst  Him  ;    with  the  gathering  gloom  of  the  hour  and 
power  of  darkness,  which  thickened  more  and   more.     And 
alithe  strong  cryings,  and  tears,  and  prayers,  and  supplica- 
tiois,  which   He  had  made  during  His  life  to  be  delivered 
fro.i  death,  were  gathered  and  concentrated  into  one  biggest 
utterance  of  desolation  and  abandonment ;  which  was  ex- 
presed  in  these  words,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsicen  me !"  while,  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  faith  which  at 
variois  times  He  had  exercised  under  His  many  trials,  and 
whia  had  so  triumphantly  carried  Him  through  them  all, 
beini summoned  up  to  His  help,  was  so  distressed  and  put 
abou  by  the  multitude  of  His  present  enemies,  that  it  had 
but  pwer  to  breathe  out  a  prayer,  such  as  the  most  outcast 
sinnei  and  public  criminal  will  adopt,  and  doth  commonly 
adopt"  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit." 

To  nderstand  the  cause  of  this  extremity,  and  of  the  con- 
dition ito  which  the  Lord  passed  after  death,  it  is  necessary 
to  go  Uck,  and  reflect  a  little  upon  that  original  curse,  from 
the  po^r  of  which  He  had  come  forth  to  redeem  men  :  "  In 
the  da^thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  The  sen- 
tence v.s  death,  and  death  is  the  execution  of  the  sentence. 
What,  len,  is  life  ?  Life  we  hold  of  the  purchase  of  Christ's 
sacrific(made  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Whether 
you  regrd  the  life  of  any  individual,  or  the  life  of  the  race  of 
men,  orhe  life  of  animals,  or  the  vegetable  life  of  the  world, 


296  THE  INCARNATION: 

it  is  all  a  fruit,  a  common  fruit  of  redemption,  a  benefit  of  the 
death  of  Christ,  from  all  eternity  purposed,  and  so  far  as  God 
is  concerned  accomplished   also.     Nevertheless,  like  all  the 
benefits  of  Christ's  death  which  are  common  to  all,  it  is  not  of 
the  nature  of  a  covenant,  but  of  a  grant  at  will ;  not  of  a  cer- 
tainty, but  of  a  possibility  ;  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  calcu- 
lated upon  for  a  day  or  for  an  hour.     And  though  there  be 
light  diffused  around,  and  every  necessary  of  life,  and  the 
materials  of  much  enjoyment ;  still  it  is  all  in  uncertainty ; 
a  chaos,  out  of  which  something  fixed  and  stable  seeneth 
to  be  forming  itself,  but  not  the  very  thing  ;  a  life  in  cfcath, 
and  a  death  in  life  ;    a   hope,  a  promise,  a  possibility]  but 
no  more  :  the  enemy  being  held  at  bay,  but  growling  ii  the 
distance,  and  ever  snatching  his  prey  upon  the  right  land 
and  the  left,  yet  restrained  :  as  it  were,  a  respite,  but  not  a 
reprieve  ;  an  arena  for  certain  trials  and  preparations  pre- 
vious  to   the   sealing   of  the   fixed  and   ultimate  mandae. 
Such  is  life.     But  death  is  not  such  :   it  is   no  promise  Or 
threatening,  but  the  very  reality ;  not  a  hopeful  possibilcy, 
but  a  stern  necessity  :  within  the  verge  of  which  lies  nore- 
pentance  nor  remission,  nor  change  for  better  or  for  woise ; 
but  fate,  irrevocable  fate.     Death  is  indeed  like  the  fulfilrjent 
of  a  word  of  God,  it  is  so  steadfast  and  immovable,     jb  is 
not  like  sickness,  which  is  fluctuating  ;  nor  like  disease,  wich 
is  curable  ;  nor  like  sorrow,  which  is  mitigable  :  nor  is  \  the 
conflict  of  good  and  ill, .of  hope  and  fear;  but  the  corfum- 
mation  and   perpetuity  either  of  the  one  or   of  the  jither. 
Death   is    the   execution    of  the    mandate ;  it   is   the  prse 
eflected  ;  the  expulsion  from  the  very  hope  and  drern  of 
Eden.     Such  is  the  difference  between  life   and    dean ;  so 
great  and  comprehensive,  that  they  are  in  human  laifuage 
used  as  the  most  direct  of  all  opposites,  and  the  most?olent 
of  all  contraries.     And  yet  even  death  hath  receive  from 
Christ's  sacrifice  a  certain  benefit,  which  retardeth  te  evil 
day  of  the  curse's  consummation,  which  taketh  noj  effect 
until  after  the  judgment  in  the  second  death.     Mehwhile 
there  is  to  the  body  a  rest  in  the  grave  ;  and  to  the  jparate 
soul  there  is  a  looking  for  and  a  waiting  for  of  judment  : 
which  conditions  of  rest  and  fearful  expectation,  evel  in  the 


ITS  PREPARA  TION  AND  ACT.  297 

wickedest,  are  nothing  to  be  compared  to  the  awful  reality 
of  woe  and  misery  which  cometh  on  in  the  second  death  ; 
and  which  would  doubtless  have  been  the  instantaneous 
effect  of  the  curse,  had  it  not  been  beaten  off  and  postponed 
by  the  powerful  mediation  and  intercession  of  Christ,  slain 
for  us  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  I  say,  that,  but  for 
Christ  and  His  righteousness,  this  earth  had  instantly,  on  the 
fall  of  man,  passed  into  the  condition  of  the  lake  that  burneth, 
and  man  into  the  condition  of  the  second  death  ;  or,  like  the 
angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate,  he  had  been  impri- 
soned in  chains  of  darkness  until  the  judgment  of  the  great 
day.  Such  is  the  common,  such  is  the  universal  remedy  of 
that  offering,  that  it  is  by  virtue  of  the  redemption  of  Christ 
the  sun  shineth  upon  the  evil  and  the  good  ;  by  the  redemp- 
tion of  Christ  the  rain  descendeth  upon  the  just  and  the  un- 
just ;  by  reason  of  the  redemption  of  Christ  the  body  resteth 
in  the  grave  ;  and  by  reason  of  the  redemption  of  Christ  the 
separate  spirits  are  in  prison,  and  not  in  the  lake  that  burneth, 
which  is  the  second  death.  So  that  the  curse  doth  not  com- 
pletely take  effect  until  the  day  of  judgment ;  at  which  it 
will  be  found  that  this  earth  hath  been  redeemed  gloriously, 
and  the  bodies  of  innumerable  saints  have  arisen  gloriously 
from  the  dead,  and  the  souls  of  innumerable  saints  have 
come  forth  gloriously  from  the  paradise  of  the  separate  spirits 
to  enjoy  the  heaven  which  Christ  hath  sanctified  and  blessed, 
and  for  the  inhabitation  of  which  He  hath  sanctified  and 
blessed  them. 

Now,  brethren,  after  meditating  these  common,  and  I  may 
say  universal,  blessings  of  redemption,  which  flow  from  our 
Lord's  humiliation,  let  us  consider  more  particularly  what 
He  hath  accomplished  within  this  space  and  condition,  which 
He  had  won  from  instant  perdition,  for  the  sake  of  those  who 
have  made  with  Him  a  covenant  by  sacrifice.  This  present 
season  of  life,  and  that  future  delay  of  the  second  death,  I 
regard  but  as  so  much  room  made  for  displaying  certain 
gracious  objects,  and  bringing  to  pass  certain  glorious  pur- 
poses, by  which  the  glory  of  God  may  be  advanced  over  and 
above  the  glory  of  Satan,  the  triumphs  of  faith  and  love  over 
falsehood  and  malice  :  and  this  room,  which  the  virtue  of  His 


298  THE  INCARNATION: 

sacrifice  had  gained  out  of  the  grasp  of  the  curse,  Christ 
hath  occupied  upon  the  earth  with  a  Church,  and  in  the 
realms  beneath  with  a  paradise.  For  as  there  is  upon  the 
earth  a  Church  and  an  outward  world  ;  so  is  there  beneath, 
or,  as  the  Scriptures  say,  under  the  earth,  a  paradise  and  a 
prison,  a  place  of  comparative  blessedness  and  comparative 
misery  ;  though  not  to  be  likened,  as  I  judge,  to  that  blessed- 
ness and  misery  which  shall  be  realised  after  the  judgment. 
Which  Church  upon  the  earth,  being  compared  with  the 
world,  is,  as  it  were,  a  paradise ;  wherein  are  found  the  grace 
of  God  and  His  forgiveness,  and  peace  with  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  truth  and  righteousness,  and  the  com- 
munion of  saints,  and  the  hope  of  salvation,  and  whatever 
other  blessings  pertain  to  God's  own  inheritance.  Whereas 
the  world  is  under  sin  and  condemnation  ;  and  Satan  is  its 
prince,  and  destruction  its  certain  doom  :  it  is  deceived,  and 
is  in  bondage,  and  discord,  and  discontent ;  in  one  word,  it  is 
but  the  court  of  the  prison  into  which  they  pass  at  death  ; 
and  that  prison  of  darkness  is  but  the  safe  and  doleful  lodg- 
ing in  which  they  are  kept  until  the  day  of  judgment,  upon 
which  ensueth  the  eternity  of  the  second  death.  Now  as  this 
Church  hath  been  in  the  living  world,  on  this  side  of  death, 
since  the  fall ;  so  also  from  the  beginning  hath  that  paradise 
been  in  the  spiritual  world,  on  the  other  side  of  death.  And 
as  of  that  church  Abraham  is  commonly  represented  as  the 
father,  being  called  the  father  of  the  faithful  ;  so  that  para- 
dise is  called  the  bosom  of  Abraham,  where  the  righteous, 
who  have  been  followers  of  his  faith,  are  quiet  sharers  in  the 
blessed  and  beatific  repose  of  his  spirit.  These  two  blessed 
certainties,  therefore — the  certainty  of  the  Church  on  earth, 
and  the  certainty  of  the  paradise  of  blessedness  into  which 
they  are  gathered — are  the  two  great  and  glorious  works 
which  Christ  hath  wrought  within  the  coasts  of  time,  and 
beyond  the  bourne  of  the  grave.  And  besides  these,  it  is 
well  said  in  our  Catechism,  that  "  the  bodies  of  the  saints, 
being  united  to  Christ,  do  rest  in  their  graves  until  the  resur- 
rection." 

Now,  though  these  two  most  blessed  estates,  the  Church 
and  the  paradise,  on  this  side  of  death  and  on  the  other  side 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  299 

of  death,  have  been  in  being  since  the  fall,  purchased  by  the 
infinite  value  of  Christ's  eternal  sacrifice,  and  produced  by 
the  mighty  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  bringeth  into 
substantial  being  that  which  the  Word  hath  obtained  and 
verified  ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  when  Christ  was  manifested, 
He  had  in  the  body  to  pay  the  ransom  and  undergo  the 
humiliation ;  to  come  under  the  curse,  and  overcome  the 
enemies  of  His  Church.  He  suffered  for  Abraham  and 
for  Moses,  and  the  former  Church,  as  well  as  for  Peter 
and  Paul,  and  the  latter  Church.  In  His  life  He  fought 
the  battle  for  the  life  of  His  Church,  and  prevailed  ;  and  by 
that  victory,  which  He  gained  over  sin  in  the  flesh,  we 
are  assured  of  victory  over  sin  in  the  flesh  ;  and  by  that 
defeat  which  He  gave  to  our  spiritual  enemies,  we  are  as- 
sured of  defeating  them  ;  and  by  His  victory  over  the  world, 
we  triumph  over  it :  and  so  on,  through  all  the  temptations 
and  vicissitudes  on  this  side  the  grave.  Our  High  Priest 
having  been  tried  with  the  same,  and  having  prevailed,  we 
are  sure  of  prevailing  when  we  are  tried. — But,  brethren, 
what  say  you  of  the  state  beyond  death  .?  Of  the  body,  we 
say  that  it  will  rise,  because  Christ's  also  rose  :  His  resurrec- 
tion is  the  comfort  of  my  body  in  death  :  "  I  know  that 
my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  therefore  in  my  flesh  I  shall  see 
him."  True  ;  a  most  blessed  truth,  dearly  to  be  cherished  by 
this  frail  and  painful  body.  But  of  thy  separate  spirit,  my 
brother,  what  assurance  hast  thou  }  what  becometh  of  it } 
Why,  my  Lord's  spirit  descended  into  the  place  of  separate 
spirits ;  and,  in  spite  of  all  the  powers  thereof.  He  returned 
back  again  to  the  realms  of  light,  even  to  the  earth,  and  re- 
claimed His  body  from  the  tomb :  and  therefore  I  am  assured 
that  my  spirit  also  shall  come  forth  thence,  when  the  fulness 
of  time  is  come ;  shall  come  forth  unto  the  earth,  and  reclaim 
my  body  from  the  tomb.  But  if  Christ  descended  not  thither, 
what  assurance  hast  thou .''  for  I  have  none.  The  secrets  of 
that  place  if  my  Redeemer  hath  not  penetrated  into,  if  He 
hath  not  rifled  them,  then  indeed  it  is  a  gloomy  mansion, 
whose  strength  I  know  not,  or  rather  whose  weakness  I  know 
not.  Besides,  if  Christ  descended  not  thither,  how  was  that 
paradise  won  from  the  waste  .-^     We  see  how  by  His  life,  by 


300  THE  INCARNA  TION  : 

the  humiliation  and  victory  of  His  life,  the  Church  was  won 
from  the  waste  world  ;  but  how  in  life  could  that  which  is 
not  within  the  realms  of  life  be  won  ?  The  Lord  certainly, 
therefore,  in  descending  into  hell  (not  the  place  of  torment, 
but  the  place  of  separate  spirits),  went  thither  to  build  the 
gates  of  paradise  upon  the  rock  of  His  Divinity,  as  He  had 
builded  in  His  life  the  gates  of  His  Church  thereon  ;  to  drive 
back  the  powerful  demons ;  to  found  the  impassable  gulf,  and 
make  it  sure  ;  and  to  establish  the  spirits  of  His  saints  in 
blessedness.  In  order  to  accomplish  the  former.  He  went 
through  the  humiliation  and  suffering  of  life ;  and  in  order  to 
accomplish  the  latter,  He  went  through  the  humiliation  and 
suffering  beyond  life :  in  entering  into  which.  He  cried  out, 
"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  yet  by 
faith  prevailed  to  add,  "  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend 
my  spirit."  It  is  into  this,  the  last  and  lowest  act  of  the  Lord's 
humiliation,  that  we  are  inquiring,  by  the  light  and  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures. 

And  now  for  the  further  illustration  of  this,  the  fourth  act 
in  the  Lord's  humiliation — which  I  have  opened  with  the 
more  latitude,  because  it  not  only  is  not  regarded  in  our 
present  shallowness  of  doctrine  and  enlightened  abhorrence 
of  all  mystery;  but  is  wholly  rejected,  under  the  influence  of 
a  loose,  popular,  confused  notion,  that  our  Lord's  soul  did 
instantly  upon  His  death  pass  into  the  glorious  presence  of 
God ;  which  I  have  no  hesitation  in  denouncing  as  a  fun- 
damental error  in  doctrine,  and  one  of  a  very  evil  con- 
sequence— I  say,  in  further  illustration  of  the  sore  pains 
of  death,  and  restrictions  of  the  separate  state .  (or,  as  the 
Creed  hath  it,  of  "hell")  into  which  the  Lord  descended, 
I  have  these  two  types  or  emblems,  contained  in  the  Old 
Testament,  to  offer  unto  you, — the  entombing  of  Jonah  in 
the  belly  of  the  whale,  and  the  lengthening  out  of  Heze- 
kiah's  life  :  the  former  upon  our  Lord's  own  authority ;  the 
latter  upon  good  grounds,  which,  if  time  permit,  I  shall  ex- 
plain. 

In  the  1 2th  chapter  of  Matthew,  at  the  39th  verse,  our 
Lord,  in  answer  to  the  Pharisees  who  sought  of  Him  a  sign, 
thus  delivered  Himself:  "An  evil  and  adulterous  generation 


/  TS  PRE  PA  RA  riON  AND  ACT.  301 

seeketh  after  a  sign  ;  and  there  shall  no  sign  be  given  to  it, 
but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas  :  for  as  Jonas  was  three 
days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so  shall  the  Son  of 
man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth." 
In  various   parts  of  the  Old  Testament,  especially  of  the 
prophet  Isaiah,  as  in  chapters  xi.,  xviii.,  and  xxxi.,  Messiah  is 
said  to  set  up  an  ensign  for  His  people,  unto  which  the  Gen- 
tiles should  seek  in  fear  and  terror.     And  the  Jews,  little 
acquainted,  and  caring  not  to  acquaint  themselves,  with  the 
prophecies  of  Messiah's  humiliation  and  suffering,  wanted  that 
ensign,  or  sign,  (for  these  words  are  one  in  the  Septuagint  and 
the  Gospels,)  to  which  the  prophets  did  attach  such  glorious 
effects,  and  which  they  expected  in  tenfold  more  power  and 
glory  than  that  which  accompanied  Moses  and  the  congrega- 
tion in  the  pillar  of  the  cloud.     The  fulfilment  of  this  promise, 
Christ  admonisheth  that  generation  not  to  expect,  because  it 
was  an  evil  and  adulterous  generation,  not  worthy  to  enter 
into  glory,  but  into  deep  humiliation  and  suffering:  and  there- 
fore the  sign  which  they  should  receive  from  the  Son  of  man 
would  be  that  of  the  prophet  Jonah  ;  who,  for  his  rebellion 
against  God,  was  cast  into  the  deep,  and  swallowed  up  of  the 
whale,  in  whose  dark  and  loathsome  belly  he  abode  three 
days   and   three   nights.      This  sign,  He   further  declareth, 
should  be  given  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  man,  who  in  like 
manner  should  be  three  days  and  three  nights — that  is,  (ac- 
cording to  the  Eastern  custom  of  speaking  unto  this  day,)  for 
a  period  which  should  be  portioned  out  of  three  days  and 
three  nights — in  the  heart  of  the  earth.     Now,  brethren,  a 
sign  must  answer,  and  be  conformable  to,  the  thing  signified, 
otherwise  it  is  no  sign  of  that  thing,  but  the  sign  of  some- 
thing else.     Thus,  baptism  is  a  sign  of  regeneration,  because, 
if  you^  take  it  by  sprinkling,  it  signifieth  our  being  purged 
from  an  evil  conscience  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  taketh  and  applieth   unto  our 
souls  ;  or,  if  you  take  it  by  dipping,  which  the  Church  hinder- 
eth  not,  though  she  judgeth  it  not  indispensable,  then  it  sig- 
nifieth the  being  buried  with  Christ  as  to  our  old  man,  and 
risen  with  Him  as  to  our  new  man,  to  live  unto  God.     Like- 
wise the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  sign  of  the  new  man's  feeding 


302  THE  INCARNA  TION: 

upon  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  The  doctrine  that  the 
two  sacraments  are  no  more  than  bare  and  naked  signs,  we 
utterly  abhor  and  detest ;  but  that  they  are  most  apt  and 
beautiful  signs  of  that  consummated  life,  whereof  they  are  also 
the  actual  and  sealed  commencement  and  continuance  in 
them  who  believe,  and  in  those  who  believe  not  the  seals  of 
their  apostasy,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  And  in  somewhat  the 
same  manner  we  should  expect  the  abiding  of  the  Son  of  man 
in  the  heart  of  the  earth  to  be  a  sign  unto  that  evil  and  adul- 
terous generation.  But,  if  the  season  of  three  days  and  three 
nights,  during  which  He  there  abode,  was  a  season  of  rest,  or 
a  season  of  joy  and  glory,  how,  I  ask,  could  it  be  a  sign  unto 
that  evil  and  adulterous  generation,  which  was  about  to  be 
cast  into  the  furnace  of  the  wrath  of  God,  into  the  desolation, 
and  dissolution,  and  death,  in  which  they  have  abidden  unto 
this  day .''  Or  how  could  it  be  paralleled  with  the  state  of 
Jonah  in  the  whale's  belly,  the  saddest,  gloomiest,  most 
desperate,  and  most  loathsome  into  which  man  was  ever 
brought .''  of  which  we  may  say,  that  as  God's  almighty  power 
could  alone  have  effected  it,  so  His  omniscient  mind  could 
alone  have  imagined  it :  but  how  fit  an  emblem  of  that  low 
and  miserable  estate  into  which  the  Jews  have  been  brought ; 
whose  overwhelming  degradation  and  abysmal  suffering  hath 
as  much  surpassed  the  judgments  of  all  other  nations,  as 
Jonah's  degradation  and  captivity  surpassed  the  conception 
and  the  experience  of  every  other  man's  captivity !  For  the 
Jews  have  been  swallowed  up  alive,  and  alive  preserved,  in 
the  great  behemoth  of  power  which  rageth  in  the  sea  of  this 
unredeemed  world.  What,  then,  must  the  Son  of  man's  con- 
dition during  three  days  and  nights'  abode  in  the  heart  of  the 
earth  have  been  .''  How  abject,  how  dishonourable,  how  sor- 
rowful !  in  order  to  stand  between  Jonah's  misery  and  the 
misery  of  the  Jewish  people,  the  antitype  of  the  former,  and 
the  prototype  of  the  latter.  It  must,  indeed,  have  been  such 
as  passeth  all  comprehension  and  belief:  into  the  gulf  where- 
of when  He  was  passing  downward,  like  Jonah  into  the  open 
throat  of  that  loathsome  living  sepulchre  which  widely  opened 
its  armed  jaws  upon  the  prophet,  He  cried  aloud,  "  My  God, 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT.  303 

my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  !    Father,  into  thy  hands 
I  commend  my  spirit" 

How  absurd,  how  exceedingly  absurd,  then,  to  set  forth 
the  experience  of  the  Lord's  soul  between  death  and  the  re- 
surrection, as  an  experience  of  rest  and  joyfulness,  merely 
because  He  said  unto  the  thief  upon  the  cross,  "  To-day  shalt 
thou  be  with  me  in  paradise  !"  But,  dear  brethren,  God  for- 
bid that  I  should  for  a  moment  doubt  the  blessed  estate  of  that 
thief,  and  all  the  saints  who  sleep  in  Jesus,  while  I  maintain 
that  Christ  endured  a  most  fearful  conflict  during  His  abode 
in  the'separate  state.  I  no  more  doubt  the  blessedness  of  the 
saints  there,  than  I  doubt  their  blessedness  here.  But  by 
what  means,  in  this  life,  do  the  saints  come  by  the  peace  that 
passeth  all  understanding,  and  the  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
Was  it  not  procured  to  us  by  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in  the 
flesh  ?  Because  we  have  joy  in  the  days  of  our  flesh,  had 
He  therefore  joy  also  ?  Yes,  He  had  joy  ;  but  did  He  not 
work  it  out  by  strong  contentions  and  bloody  sweat  ?  In 
like  manner,  while  I  doubt  not  the  blessedness  of  the  sepa- 
rate state,  but  most  surely  believe  that  the  bodies  of  His 
people  do  rest  united  unto  Christ,  ready  to  come  with  Him  at 
His  coming,  I  as  surely  believe  that  they  enjoy  this  estate  of 
rest  and  blessedness  only  in  virtue  of  that  conquest  over  death 
and  over  hell  which  He  achieved  by  descending  into  death 
and  hell.  And  by  how  much  the  empire  of  Satan  in  death  is 
stronger  than  the  empire  of  Satan  in  life ;  by  how  much  the 
corruption  of  the  body  by  the  worm  is  a  more  complete  work 
of  sin,  than  any  sickness  or  sorrow  in  life ;  by  how  much  Satan's 
power  over  a  disembodied  spirit,  shut  out  from  the  hope- 
ful and  somewhat  cheerful  world,  is  more  mighty  by  far  than 
his  power  over  an  embodied  soul,  with  all  the  comforts  of  the 
earth  and  possibilities  of  the  regeneration  around  it ;  by  how 
much  hopelessness  is  more  miserable  than  hope,  and  neces- 
sity more  obdurate  than  possibility ;  by  how  much,  in  short, 
the  powers  of  death  and  hell,  and  the  outer  darkness  of  their 
dominion,  is  more  terrible  than  any  abode  of  settled  and  con- 
fined misery  upon  the  earth :  even  by  so  much  more  fearful 
was  the  struggle,  by  so  much  more  hideous  was  the  front  of 


304  THE  INCARNATION: 

battle,  by  so  much  more  terrible  the  labours  of  the  conflict, 
by  so  much  more  glorious  the  achievement  of  the  victory, 
which  the  Son  of  man  fought,  endured,  and  achieved  over 
death  and  hell,  than  was  that  which  He  fought,  and  en- 
dured, and  achieved,  over  the  powers  of  the  world  and  the 
flesh.  For  Satan  was  the  cause  of  both  conflicts  ;  Satan  and 
his  host  were  the  rulers  of  the  fleshly  and  of  the  spiritual 
conflict  which  our  Lord  endured.  Who,  when  He  had  over- 
come Satan  in  the  world,  and  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh, 
did  lay  aside  His  fleshly  mantle,  and  in  spiritual  nakedness 
descend  into  a  spiritual  battle  with  spiritual  wickednesses, 
with  the  thrones  and  dominions  and  powers  of  darkness. 
And  when  He  had  overpowered  them  in  their  own  strongest 
region,  He  returned,  and  took  His  body  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  hungry  grave,  from  the  ravenous  powers  of  corruption; 
and,  being  once  more  clothed.  He  tarried  with  His  Church 
until  the  day  of  His  ascension  into  glory.  And  in  token  of 
His  victory,  He  brought  from  the  state  of  separate  spirits  as 
many  of  the  saints  as  it  seemed  to  Him  good  ;  who  also  took 
their  bodies  from  the  grave,  and  went  with  Him  into  glory. 
But  the  best  trophy  which  He  left  behind  Him  in  that  sepa- 
rate state,  is  the  blessedness  in  which  the  souls  of  His  people 
abide,  and  the  hopefulness  in  which  their  bodies  rest ;  being 
assured  of,  and  earnestly  looking  forward  to,  the  day  of  their 
manifestation  ;  when  from  their  present  secret  and  unseen 
abodes  they  shall  come  forth,  arrayed  in  the  glory  with  which 
the  Son  of  man  shall  then  be  adorned — if,  after  their  resur- 
rection, they  be  not  appointed  for  a  season  to  set  the  Church 
in  order,  and  establish  it  triumphant  over  all  the  earth  ;  and 
thereafter  to  be  brought  by  the  Lord  into  the  glorious  pre- 
sence of  the  Father. 

So  much  light  upon  this  mystery  do  I  derive  from  the  sign 
of  Jonas,  which  was  given  to  that  evil  and  adulterous  genera- 
tion in  the  burial  of  the  body  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  the 
abode  of  His  soul  for  part  of  three  days  and  three  nights  in 
the  heart  of  the  earth.  There  is  much  more  to  be  derived 
from  that  sign,  both  as  respecteth  the  time  and  the  place  of 
His  abode  ;  which  I  reserve  until  I  shall  come,  in  the  course 
of  our  regular  lectures,  to  take  up  that  passage  of  the  gospel. 


ITS  PRE  PA  RA  TION  AND  ACT.  305 

With  respect  to  the  instance  of  the  prolongation  of  Heze- 
kiah's  hfe,  time  doth  not  permit  me  at  present  to  enter  into 
it.  But  I  pray  you  to  observe  carefully,  and  at  your  leisure 
to  meditate  diligently,  the  two  prayers,  or  prophetic  songs, 
which  Jonas  and  Hezekiah  uttered  on  those  two  most  memor- 
able occasions ;  and  you  will  see  how  the  Holy  Spirit  carrieth 
them  beyond  their  experience,  and  indeed  all  human  experi- 
ence, and  doth  indite  a  canticle  which  may  serve  to  bear  the 
faith  of  the  Church  onward  to  some  deeper  humiliation,  and 
greater  prolongation  of  life,  than  those  instances  which  to  them 
had  occurred.  And  you  may  lay  it  down  as  a  rule  universal, 
that  in  all  the  acts  of  the  Lord's  providence  which  arc  typical 
— as  the  swallowing  up  of  Pharaoh  in  the  Red  Sea,  the  gift  of 
Samuel  unto  his  mother  Hannah,  the  swallowing  up  of  Jonas, 
and  the  prolongation  of  Hezekiah's  life,  and,  above  all,  the 
numerous  incidents  of  David's  life,  which  were  almost  all 
prophetical — in  all  such  prophetical  events,  I  say,  yoii  will 
find  an  accompanying  song,  psalm,  or  canticle,  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  did  add,  as  the  interpretation  of  the  same  :  and 
of  that  song,  psalm,  or  canticle,  you  will  always  find  the  lan- 
guage too  large  for  the  event,  the  terms  too  magnificent,  the 
consequences  too  vast  and  enduring ;  in  short,  you  will  find 
it  to  include  and  enclose  the  particulars  of  that  special  event 
in  a  glorious  canopy  of  large  and  eternal  blessings — as  the 
heavens  do  surround  and  encompass  the  earth  ;  whereof  the 
blue  vault  doth  take  its  spherical  appearance  from  the  form 
of  the  earth,  and  in  all  its  motions  doth  represent  the  earth, 
with  its  restful  poles  and  circular  revolutions ;  but  is  high 
above  the  earth,  and  vast  beyond  the  earth ;  as  the  ways  of 
God  and  the  thoughts  of  God  are  high  and  vast  beyond  the 
ways  and  thoughts  of  man.  After  perusing  these  two  pro- 
phetic prayers  of  Jonas  and  Hezekiah,  I  pray  you  to  study 
the  88th  Psalm  and  the  I42d  ;  also  the  40th,  the  139th,  and 
parts  of  many  more ;  and  you  will  perceive  how  very  large  a 
portion  of  God's  anticipative  providence,  and  anticipative 
word,  hath  distinct  and  separate  reference  to  this  second 
scene  of  humiliation,  concerning  which  we  have  been  dis- 
coursing. 

VOL.  V.  U 


3o6  THE  INCARNATION: 

And  now,  dearly-beloved  brethren,  these  two  great  divi- 
sions of  our  Lord's  humiliation,  which  He  endured  at  the 
hands  of  wickedness  in  this  world,  and  of  the  spirits  of  dark- 
ness in  their  proper  abode  of  darkness,  should  bear  a  twofold 
aspect  upon  us,  who  are  the  servants  and  followers  of  Christ  : 
first,  as  respecteth  this  world,  with  the  wicked  men  of  which 
this  subject  calleth  us  to  contend  earnestly,  in  the  assurance 
of  victory  ;  and,  secondly,  as  respecteth  the  mansions  of  death, 
and  the  separate  estate  ;  into  which  it  enableth  us  to  descend 
without  any  fear  or  dread,  to  work  the  work  which  may  there 
be  assigned  us.  First,  as  respecteth  the  wicked  men  of  this 
world  :  you  are  to  separate  yourselves  from  their  wickedness, 
while,  as  the  Lord  did,  you  are  to  mingle  with  their  com- 
panies and  engage  in  their  conversations ;  testifying  every- 
where for  truth  and  righteousness,  and  patiently  bearing  the 
reproach  of  them  that  reproach  God  and  Christ.  "What 
profit  is  it,  if,  when  ye  are  reproached  for  your  faults,  you 
bear  it  patiently  ?  but  if  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of 
Christ,  happy  are  ye,  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth 
upon  you  :  and  if,  when  ye  do  well,  ye  suffer  for  it  patiently, 
this  is  acceptable  unto  God ;  for  even  hereunto  were  ye 
called  :  for  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example 
that  we  should  follow  his  steps."  Shun  not  this  conflict  with  the 
men  of  the  world,  neither  flee  away  from  their  evil  and  reproach- 
ful treatment  of  you ;  but  wait  the  time  of  the  Lord's  deliver- 
ance, and  meanwhile  commit  yourself  unto  Him  that  judgeth 
righteously.  And  remember,  brethren,  that  it  is  not  the  base 
and  unbaptized  world,  but  the  Church  which  hath  apostatised 
to  the  world,  with  which  you  have  to  contend  :  and  this 
bringeth  you  more  closely  to  the  fellowship  of  the  Lord's 
sufferings.  Every  one  of  those  who  are  of  the  world  have 
gone  out  from  us,  and  preferred  the  present  evil  world :  they 
have  rejected  Christ,  and  they  must  reject  every  one  who 
beareth  the  image  of  Christ.  They  choose  the  darkness, 
though  the  light  shineth  around  them :  they  elect  the  path 
of  evil,  though  they  were,  at  their  baptism,  introduced,  and 
have  ever  since  been  entreated  back,  into  the  path  of  up- 
rightness. What,  therefore,  can  you  look  for  at  the  hands 
of  such   but  the  enduring  vindictiveness  of  apostates,  the 


ITS  PRE  PARA  TION  AND  ACT.  307 

persecuting  rage  and  violence  of  apostates  ?  Who  are  of 
two  classes,  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees:  the  former 
adhering  to  their  forms  of  ritual  service,  and  their  outward 
works  of  piety  and  charity ;  the  latter  adhering  to  their  intel- 
lectual self-sufficiency  and  enlightened  scepticism.  And  I  tell 
you,  brethren,  that  the  Pharisaical  sect  of  apostates  will  vex 
and  trouble  you,  because  you  do  not  exalt  and  uphold  the 
visible  beauty  of  the  doctrine  or  the  discipline — that  is,  the 
beautiful  stones  of  their  temple,  or  the  Divine  and  inde- 
feasible right  of  their  Mount  Gerizim.  And  if,  over  and  above 
their  social  and  sectarian  devices  for  bringing  about  the  Lord's 
glory  and  the  earth's  blessedness,  you  will  exalt  Christ's  second 
coming  as  the  great  desire  of  the  Church  and  expectation  of 
the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  though  you  should  not  neglect  their 
tithe  of  mint  and  cummin,  if  you  will  insist  for  the  mightier 
matters  of  the  gospel-hope,  as  the  destruction  of  Antichrist, 
and  the  judgment  of  an  apostate  faithless  Church,  and  the 
glorious  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  the  bringing  in  of  the  Jewish 
Church  with  demonstration  of  mighty  power,  and  the  quick 
judgment  and  utter  downfall  of  the  apostate  Gentiles ;  you 
must  expect  contempt,  persecution,  and,  perhaps,  in  the  end, 
excommunication  and  death.  While  from  the  enlightened  and 
philosophical  (falsely  so  called)  Sadducees — that  is,  our  liberal 
and  benevolent  disbelievers  in  all  the  mysteries  of  our  holy 
religion — you  must  expect  the  uttermost  scorn  and  derision, 
as  men  of  disordered  minds  and  dangerous  opinions.  And 
what  then  .-•  "  Be  patient  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord."  Con- 
sider Him  who  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
Himself;  whose  enemies  were  those  of  His  own  household; 
whose  lovers  and  friends  were  put  far  away  from  Him  ;  who 
looked  for  comforters,  but  found  none  ;  "  who  was  despised 
and  rejected  of  men  ;  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with 
grief."  Behold,  the  Judge  is  at  the  door.  Hold  up  your 
heads,  because  your  redemption  draweth  nigh.  Then  shall 
we  be  glorified  when  God  hath  been  glorified  in  us.  But  we 
must  first  drink  of  His  cup,  and  be  baptized  with  His  bap- 
tism, in  order  to  enter  into  His  kingdom. 

Secondly,  my  dear  friends,  and  beloved  brethren  in  the 
Lord,  look  forward  to  the  grave  and  the  abode  of  the  sepa- 


308  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

rate  spirits  (if  the  Lord  should  delay  His  coming,  and  not 
change  us  in  the  flesh) ;  look  forward  to  the  unseen  chambers 
of  the  grave,  and  the  paradise  of  God,  as  to  a  resting  with 
Christ,  and  a  rejoicing  in  Christ,  against  the  day  of  our  es- 
pousals with  Him  whom  our  soul  loveth.  For  Christ  carried 
these  powers  also  captive  at  His  chariot  wheels:  according  to 
that  word  of  St  Paul,  "  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but 
that  he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ?" 
This  day's  discourse  is  the  assurance  to  the  believer  of  the 
continuance  there  of  the  same  triumph  over  the  prince  of 
darkness,  which  he  hath  had  in  the  present  life.  Yea,  and  of 
a  place  of  rest  in  Abraham's  bosom ; — but  not  of  unanti- 
cipating  satisfaction  ;  nay,  but  of  longing,  of  earnest  longing, 
and  of  active  praying,  until  the  day  of  the  reunion  of  the 
soul  with  the  body,  and  her  marriage  with  the  Lamb.  Ay, 
and  more  :  I  believe  a  state  of  activity,  of  active  driving  back 
and  discomfiting  of  Satan's  evil  power  in  those  regions  ;  of 
wounding,  and  bruising,  and  vexing,  and  plaguing  him,  and 
conquering  and  triumphing  over  him,  and  perpetuating  the 
work  which  in  those  mansions  the  Lord  did  set  on  foot.  Into 
which  things  I  enter  not  at  large  ;  but  am  content  to  ensure 
you  that  the  same  presence  of  Christ  which  sustained  you 
here,  and  made  you  more  than  conquerors  in  flesh  over  sin, 
and  over  Satan  in  the  world  enthroned,  will  sustain  you 
there,  and  make  you  more  than  conquerors  over  Satan  in  his 
spiritual  power  ;  there  being  no  more  doubt,  no  more  uncer- 
tainty, but  glory,  joy,  and  assurance,  expectation,  desire,  and 
earnest  longing  for  the  day  of  our  manifestation  as  the  sons 
of  God,  for  the  day  of  our  adoption  by  the  redemption  of  the 
body. 

O  brethren,  what  a  scene  of  deep  meditation  I  have  car- 
ried you  over !  opening  to  you  the  humiliation  of  the  Son  of 
man  for  the  end  of  God's  glory  and  our  salvation  ; — His  con- 
tention with  all  the  spirits  of  evil  in  earthly  places,  and  in  the 
deep  places  of  their  unhindered  strength  ; — His  temptations 
in  flesh  with  every  form  of  sin,  and  His  extreme  and  utter 
desertion  in  death  ; — a  threefold  region,  deeper  and  deeper 
still  of  trial  and  of  suffering ;  the  first,  commencing  from  the 
temptation  in  the  wilderness,  and  extending  over  His  life  ; 


ITS  PREPARATION  AND  ACT  309 

the  second,  commencing  from  the  Garden  of  Gethsemanc,  and 
extending  to  His  death  ;  the  last,  commencing  from  those 
excruciating  words,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  for- 
saken me!"  and  extending  over  the  period  of  His  disem- 
bodied being.  All  this  travail  of  the  Son  of  man,  my 
brethren,  was  undergone  for  the  glory  of  God  in  the  re- 
demption of  our  souls!  What  think  you,  then,  of  the  un- 
measurable  love  with  which  God  hath  loved  you  in  His  Son  ? 
What  think  you  of  the  inexpressible  value  of  your  souls, 
which  were  bought  with  such  a  price  ?  What  think  you  of 
the  inconceivable  glory  for  which  such  deep  humiliation  pre- 
pared the  way  ?  Will  you  then  contemn  this  love  ;  will  you 
set  at  nought  this  sacrifice  ;  will  you  barter  away  this  birth- 
right of  glory,  because  you  have  to  be  followers  of  this  humi- 
lity ?  Count  ye  it  not  rather  honourable  to  walk  where  the 
Son  of  God  walked,  and  to  suffer  wherein  He  suffered  ?  For 
its  own  sake,  would  you  not  rather  suffer  with  the  Son  of 
God,  than  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin,  or  rejoice  with  the  ser- 
vants of  sin  ?  Or  would  you  shuffle  off  the  form  of  His 
humiliation,  strike  a  truce  with  the  world,  and  give  way  to 
the  devil,  and  indulge  the  flesh ;  and  perish  utterly  ?  Perish 
utterly  from  the  way,  all  who  are  ashamed  of  Christ's  cross  ! 
Perish  utterly  from  the  way,  all  who  go  about  to  please  them- 
selves, and  not  Him  whose  disciples  and  servants  we  are  !  O 
Lord,  grant  us  grace  never  to  be  ashamed  of  Thy  Son  !  O  God, 
grant  us  grace  never  to  be  ashamed  of  the  Son  of  man  !  Endow 
us  with  strength  to  follow  Him  through  good  and  through 
bad  report ;  and  to  give  our  life  for  Him  who  gave  His  life  a 
ransom  for  us ;  yea,  and  to  give  our  life  for  the  brethren  for 
whom  He  died. 

For  the  encouragement  of  such  devoted  fcllow-suffcring, 
for  the  ashaming  of  such  shrinking  and  apostate  fears,  take 
this  discourse  as  my  offering  unto  you,  dear  brethren ;  wherein 
I  have,  according  to  my  gift,  laid  out  in  order  the  fourfold 
act  of  humiliation  and  suffering  which  the  Son  of  man  under- 
went in  order  to  bring  glory  unto  God,  to  be  to  us  both  for 
instruction  and  for  assurance  :  for  instruction,  to  guide  us  in 
the  way ;  and  for  assurance,  to  encourage  us  in  the  way.  If 
we  would  bring  glory  to  God,  and  be  glorified  with  the  glory 


3 1 o  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

of  the  Son  of  man,  we  must  walk  in  His  footsteps,  and  con- 
tend with  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  as  He  did ;  and, 
having  fought  the  good  fight,  and  finished  our  course,  enter, 
as  He  did,  into  the  joy  of  our  Lord.  And  to  success  in  this, 
nothing  will  avail  but  earnestly  and  constantly  to  look  unto 
Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith ;  who  endured  the 
cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  is  now  set  down  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  "  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 
and  die,  it  abideth  alone ;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much 
fruit."  He  died  only  to  bear  fruit  in  us ;  by  death  to  destroy 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  and  deliver  them  who 
through  the  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to 
bondage  :  He  died  to  bruise  Satan  under  our  feet :  He  died 
to  condemn  sin  in  the  flesh,  and  to  deliver  us  from  the  curse 
of  the  law  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  We 
are  the  fruit  which  have  grown  from  that  seed  that  fell  into 
the  ground  and  died.  We  have  the  first-fruits  of  that  glory 
into  which  He  entered,  even  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise, 
which  is  the  earnest  of  our  glory :  and  it  is  in  no  single 
strength,  it  is  in  no  human  or  private  strength,  that  we  go 
out  to  this  warfare  against  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh ; 
but  it  is  in  the  strength  of  Him  who  conquered :  for  we  are 
but  a  continuation  of  His  strength  ;  His  very  body,  possessed 
with  His  very  Spirit :  in  us  God  worketh  mightily  to  will  and 
to  do  of  His  good  pleasure :  "  We  are  his  workmanship, 
created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath 
before  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them."  Therefore, 
beloved  brethren,  this  discourse,  descriptive  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings, is  a  discourse  exhortative  and  instructive  to  you  to  un- 
dertake the  fellowship  of  the  same :  this  discourse,  descriptive 
of  Christ's  triumph  over  all  His  and  your  enemies,  is  a  dis- 
course full  of  assurance  to  every  one  who  believeth  in  Christ. 
It  is  by  spreading  our  souls  in  wide  contemplation  of  the 
mighty  work  of  God  in  the  humiliation  and  exaltation  of  the 
Son  of  man  ;  it  is  by  collecting  our  souls  in  intenser  medita- 
tion upon  the  personal  experiences  of  the  Son  of  man  ;  that 
we  shall  grow  into  His  image  ;  and  be  led  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
into  these  the  deep  things  of  God,  into  which  I  have  sought 
a  little  to  introduce  you  this  day.      Therefore  I  do  entreat 


ITS  PRE  PARA  TION  AND  A  CT.  3 1 1 

you  to  "consider  Him  who  endured  such  contradiction  of  sin- 
ners against  Himself,  lest  you  also  be  weary  and  faint  in  your 
minds."  He  hath  set  us  an  example,  that  we  should  follow 
His  steps.  "  Now,  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again 
from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  that  Great  Shepherd  of  the 
sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  make 
you  perfect  in  every  good  work,  to  do  his  will ;  working  in 
you  that  which  is  well-pleasing  in  his  sight,  through  Jesus 
Christ;  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever!    Amen." 


V. 

THE  FRUITS  OF  THE  INCARNATION. 

EpH.  I.  2. 

Grace  be  to  yon,  and  peace. 

"VVT'E  have,  in  the  preceding  discourses,  considered  the 
incarnation  as  a  great  purpose  of  the  Divine  coun- 
sels, designed  for  the  ends  of  God's  own  glory,  and  accom- 
plished by  the  manifestation  of  God's  fulness  in  the  person 
of  the  Son,  who  for  that  end  became  man  :  and  it  remains 
that  \ve  should  now  shew  what  fruits,  unto  the  children  of 
men  and  unto  the  world,  it  hath  left  behind  it.  To  endea- 
vour to  estimate  how  much  mankind  are  the  better  for  this 
wonderful  act  of  God,  is  the  subject  of  our  present  dis- 
course. And  here  we  do,  of  design,  limit  ourselves  to 
that  which  we  actually  possess,  without  entering  into  the 
infinite  field  of  what  we  shall  inherit  hereafter.  Not  that  I 
can  separate  the  gospel  into  parts,  and  discourse  of  it  piece- 
meal ;  but  that  I  can  shew  how  the  fulness  of  it  bears 
upon  this  present  condition  in  which  the  world  since  the 
incarnation  of  Christ  hath  been  passing  its  days.  For  I 
would  be  considerate  of  the  Church's  present  sickly  and 
infirm  condition  ;  and  would  not  sicken  her  weakened  appe- 
tite by  presenting  such  objects  of  faith  as  a  second  advent, 
and  a  glorious  kingdom  of  the  saints  upon  the  earth  ;  but 
would  humbly  endeavour,  by  serving  out  some  such  food  as 
she  hath  a  relish  for,  to  bring  her  into  a  state  of  lustier  and 
stronger  health.  Because,  God  knows,  I  pity  from  my  heart 
our  leanness,  and  I  know  too  well  the  communion  of  the 
saints  to  think  that  I,  or  any  other,  can  escape  from  it  other 
wise  than  by  endeavouring  to  deliver  all  the  election  of  grace. 
There  is  a  law  of  organisation  in  the  body  of  Christ,  which 


THE  INCARNATION:  ITS  FRUITS. 


6'6 


forbiddeth  one  to  flee  from,  and  stand  independent  of,  the 
rest.  As  soon  might  one  member  of  the  body  expect  to 
thrive  by  labouring  for  itself  only. 

Now,  in  considering  the  subject  of  the  fruits  which  we  have 
from  the  incarnation,  I  perceive  them  to  be  twofold — the  one 
respecting  our  knowledge  of  the  grace  of  God  ;  the  other  re- 
specting our  enjoyment  of  peace  within  ourselves.  Of  the 
substance  of  this  grace  and  peace,  as  derived  from  the  incar- 
nation, I  would  first  speak.  Then  I  would  speak  of  the  free 
publication  of  them  to  men.  And,  thirdly,  of  the  application 
of  them  to  every  individual. 


PART  I. 

I  am  first,  therefore,  to  speak  of  the  substance  of  that 
grace  and  peace  with  which  we  are  blessed  by  the  incarna- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  And  first,  of  grace. — The  grace  of  God  is  an  essential 
and  substantial  part  of  the  Divine  being  and  existency,  like 
wisdom,  or  justice,  or  goodness,  or  truth :  not  an  accidental, 
but  an  eternal  and  necessary,  attribute  of  His  substance  ; 
which  He  may  reveal  and  manifest  to  His  creatures,  or  with- 
hold to  His  own  enjoyment,  as  it  may  seem  good  to  His  own 
infinite  wisdom  and  unrestrained  will.  But  if  it  is  to  be  mani- 
fested to  the  creatures,  those  who  are  the  subjects  of  it  must 
have  come  under  His  mortal  displeasure ;  because  grace  is 
more  than  goodness — it  is  forgiveness  and  favour  to  those 
who  have  deserved  our  displeasure.  And  how  creatures  are 
to  become  objects  of  the  disfavour  of  God,  who  is  invari- 
able in  His  goodness,  otherwise  than  by  despising  His  good- 
ness in  their  creation,  and  setting  His  holy  will  at  nought, 
and  trampling  on  the  expressed  and  ordained  laws  of  their 
being,  is  not  to  be  conceived.  Sin,  therefore,  is  a  pre-re- 
quisite  to  grace ;  and  only  a  sinner  can  be  the  subject  of 
grace :  others  may  know  goodness,  but  sinners  alone  can 
know  grace.  And  herein  is  beheld  the  mystery  of  the  fall  of 
man,  and  of  the  entering  in  of  sin,  in  order  to  make  way  for 
the  manifestation  of  that  grace  of  God  which  could  not  other- 


314  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

wise  be  divulged.  But  while  this  is  truly  so,  and  doth  com- 
fort us  with  the  power  and  purpose  of  God  in  bringing  good 
out  of  evil,  we  are  not  therefore  the  less  to  stand  amazed 
with  horror  at  sin,  or  the  less  to  admire  the  boundless  love 
and  grace  of  God  in  redeeming  us  from  sin.  It  doth,  indeed, 
but  reflect  the  greater  honour  and  glory  upon  this  attribute 
of  the  Divine  character  concerning  which  we  discourse,  that 
it  should  come  in  to  restore  and  rebuild,  to  heal  and  remedy, 
the  disagreement  and  disorder  of  that  most  excellent  work 
which  was  produced  from  the  labour  of  all  the  other  attri- 
butes of  God.  In  all  our  discourse,  therefore,  of  the  manifes- 
tation and  operation  of  grace,  we  should  never  fail  to  remem- 
ber that  its  fountain  is  in  God,  and  that  all  its  abundance 
proceedeth  from  Him. 

But  though  this  grace  be  an  essential  part  of  the  Divine 
substance  which  doth  require  a  sinful  creature  to  exercise 
itself  upon,  it  is  an  act  of  Divine  will  and  sovereignty  whether 
it  shall  be  exercised  at  all,  and  also  upon  whom  it  shall  be 
exercised  :  whereof  the  great  and  standing  proof  is  given  to 
us  in  His  having  passed  by  the  angels  which  kept  not  their 
first  estate,  whose  sin  gives  them  no  claim  to  that  which  we 
of  sovereign  grace  received.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
Lord  might  have  left  us  all  to  perish  in  that  estate  of  sin  and 
misery  into  which  we  had  fallen  :  otherwise,  if  there  lay  any 
incumbency  upon  Him,  it  were  no  more  grace,  but  obliga- 
tion. If  He  were  not  free  to  pass  us  by,  then  was  He  obliged 
to  take  us  up ;  and  room  for  grace  there  were  none.  Grace  is 
not  goodness,  nor  is  it  harmony,  nor  is  it  wisdom,  nor  any 
other  attribute  of  God  which  is  exhibited  in  creation  ;  but  it 
is  that  power  and  liberty  which  remaineth  in  God  after  all 
these  have  done  their  work,  and  seen  that  work  frustrated  by 
sin,  to  come  in  the  second  time,  and  out  of  the  ruins  build  a 
more  glorious  temple  than  the  first,  so  framed  and  fashioned 
as  to  reveal  hidden  treasures  of  the  Godhead  which  the  first 
could  never  bring  to  light.  The  question  why  there  should 
be  a  ruin  at  all  we  touch  not  here :  we  do  but  say,  that  a  ruin 
there  must  be,  a  fallen  and  miserable  estate  of  sin,  before 
grace  hath  any  occasion  to  discover  or  room  to  display  itself 
It  is  in  recovering  men  from  ruin,  and  saving  them  from  per- 
dition, that  the  grace  of  God  exerts  itself;  as  His  power  did 


ITS  FRUITS.  315 

exert  itself  in  creating  them  at  first.  And  grace  shews  itself 
in  wisdom  and  in  righteousness  and  in  harmony  and  in  holi- 
ness and  in  goodness  and  in  truth,  even  as  creation  did  :  so 
that  I  feel  obliged  to  take  a  somewhat  higher  ground,  and 
say,  that  grace  is  not  an  attribute  of  God,  like  wisdom,  power, 
holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth:  but  a  form  of  the  will 
of  God,  whereof  all  those  arc  but  the  attributes  or  character- 
istics. As  the  will  to  create  was  waited  on  and  carried  into 
effect  by  all  those  attendant  attributes,  so  also  was  the  will  to 
save.  The  act  of  grace  is,  therefore,  like  the  act  of  creation, 
and  hath  its  similitude  in  nothing  else.  It  is  another  mood, 
if  I  may  so  express  it,  in  the  Divine  mind  ;  another  act  in 
the  great  mystery  of  manifesting  Himself.  Grace,  therefore,  is 
not  mercy,  but  mercy  is  to  be  seen  in  grace  ;  it  is  not  holiness, 
but  holiness  is  to  be  seen  in  grace ;  and  so  of  every  other 
attribute  of  the  Godhead.  It  is  a  new  act  of  the  Divine  will,  in 
which  all  the  features  of  the  Divinity  will  manifest  themselves. 
And,  still  a  little  higher  to  ascend  into  the  nature  of  grace, 
I  would  observe,  that  it  is  not,  as  it  were,  the  second  term  of 
a  decreasing,  but  of  an  increasing  series  ;  not  of  a  descending, 
but  of  an  ascending  ratio  :  it  is  not  the  repairing  of  a  breach, 
or  the  reforming  of  a  mistake,  or  the  remedying  of  a  disease ; 
but  it  is  the  further  opening  of  the  mystery  of  the  Divine 
Being,  and  the  exalting  of  the  Divine  handiwork  into  a 
higher  region :  not  to  place  man  where  Adam  was,  but  far 
above  what  Adam  had  the  idea  of;  to  exalt  the  nature  of 
man  into  consubstantial  and  eternal  union  with  the  nature  of 
God,  and  in  humanity  to  make  God  for  ever  manifest,  and  to 
lift  the  sons  of  men  into  the  nearest  link  of  the  chain  which 
hangeth  from  the  throne  of  God.  There  is  a  great  over- 
estimate and  exaggeration  of  the  work  of  creation,  by  trans- 
ferring to  it  the  spiritual  ideas  which  we  have  obtained  from 
the  regeneration,  and  decking  out  the  primitive  estate  of  the 
first  Adam  with  honours  derived  from  the  essential  properties 
of  the  second  Adam  :  but  to  me  it  is  clear  and  manifest,  that 
the  second  Adam,  which  is  the  child  of  the  regenerating 
Spirit,  is  as  much  superior  to  the  first  Adam,  which  is  the 
child  of  the  creating  Spirit,  as  a  quickening  spirit  is  to  a 
living  soul,  as  the  spiritual  body  of  the  resurrection  is  to  the 
natural  body  which  we  have  at  present ;  as  the  prime  place 


3 1 6  THE  INCARNA  TION: 

and  prerogative  of  heaven  is  to  the  possession  of  a  garden,  and 
the  sovereignty  of  the  angels  of  heaven  is  to  the  sovereignty 
of  the  creatures  of  the  earth.  And  by  how  much  I  believe 
the  issues  of  the  regeneration  to  be  unspeakably  more  noble 
than  the  issues  of  creation  were,  by  so  much  do  I  believe  this 
second  act  of  the  will  of  the  Godhead,  which  is  revealed  in 
grace,  to  be  more  excellent  than  the  former  act  of  creation 
was.  It  is  a  great  step  forward  in  the  great  work  of  self- 
manifestation  ;  it  is  a  high  advancement  in  the  progress  of  the 
stability  and  blessedness  of  all  things. — So  much,  in  general, 
may  be  said  concerning  the  nature  and  dignity  of  grace. 

And  now  I  proceed  to  speak  in  particular  of  grace  as 
manifested  in  the  redemption  of  sinful  men  by  Jesus  Christ. 
"  The  law  was  given  by  Moses ;  but  grace  and  truth  came 
by  Jesus  Christ."  For  though  it  be  oft  written  in  the  Old 
Testament,  that  God  is  gracious,  and  full  of  compassion,  and 
plenteous  in  mercy,  as  was  proper  to  a  dawning  dispensation, 
preparatory  to  the  full  manifestation  of  the  same,  there  was 
no  open  revelation  of  the  manner  how,  or  the  means  where- 
by, a  sinner  could  be  justified,  until  Christ  came.  They  were 
concluded  under  sin  by  the  law,  and  shut  up  there,  until  the 
Redeemer  should  come  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  Jacob.  Nor 
could  it  otherwise  be,  until  the  Father  was  plainly  revealed  ; 
which,  again,  could  not  be,  until  the  Son  came  forth  from  His 
bosom.  This  revelation  of  the  Father,  which  no  one  but  the 
Son  was  competent  to  make,  is  the  revelation  of  the  grace 
which  is  in  the  will  of  God.  The  name,  Father,  by  which  we 
are  permitted  to  name  the  First  Person  of  the  blessed  Tri- 
nity, is  the  proper  name  of  all  grace,  mercy,  and  love,  com- 
bined with  all  authority  and  power  and  will.  By  which  name 
no  one  may  approach  the  Godhead,  but  he  who  believeth  in 
Christ,  and  hath  been  taught  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And,  in 
truth,  the  revelation  of  God  under  a  Trinity  of  Persons  is  the 
manifestation  of  His  grace ;  and  till  grace  was  to  be  mani- 
fested, this  name  of  God — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — 
could  not  be  named,  might  not  be  imagined,  must  be  shrouded 
in  a  mystery  inaccessible  to  the  view  of  prophet  or  to  the 
eye  of  seer :  and  I  reckon  it  to  be  little  less  than  a  dishonour- 
ing of  our  Prophet's  prerogative  to  go  about  to  search  for  the 


ITS  FRUITS.  317 

open  revelation  of  it  in  the  Old  Testament,  or  in  the  work  of 
creation.  I  believe  that  in  the  work  of  creation  it  cannot  by- 
searching  be  found  out ;  and  in  the  Old  Testament  can  be 
discovered  only  by  the  interpretations  and  fulfilments  of  the 
New.  And  whosoever  can  frame  to  utter  this  name  with  his 
spirit,  is  born  of  God. 

The  Father's  grace  is  manifested  in  His  being  willing  to 
become  a  Father  to  those  who  had  already  subverted  them- 
selves from  His  favour,  and  brought  themselves  under  His 
wrath  and  curse  :  it  was  further  manifested  by  His  willingness 
to  suffer  His  Son  to  go  forth  of  His  bosom,  and  take  sinful  flesh, 
and  come  under  cursed  conditions  ;  which  was  a  thing  never 
to  have  been  imagined,  nor  ever  to  have  been  believed,  had  it 
not  been  performed  ;  and  never  to  have  been  performed,  had 
not  the  grace  of  God  been  able  to  surpass  all  limits,  both  of 
imagination  and  belief.  For  in  every  act  of  that  humiliation 
of  His  Son,  as  in  the  first  idea  of  it,  the  Father  must  be 
hidden  in  the  righteous  Judge  ;  and  this,  too,  that  He  may  be 
known  as  a  Father.  In  order,  I  say,  to  be  known  as  a  Father 
to  the  rebellious.  He  must  hide  His  fatherhood  from  the  only- 
begotten  and  well-beloved  Son :  which,  I  say  again,  were  a 
thing  incredibly  paradoxical  if  it  had  not  really  been.  And 
it  never  would  have  been,  save  to  make  known  the  infinite 
excellencies  and  profound  mysteries  of  Divine  grace  ;  how 
justice,  and  holiness,  and  most  precious  sacrifice  and  the  sus- 
pension of  tenderest  love,  how  anguish,  and  tears,  and  groans, 
and  the  strongest  torments,  and  the  deepest  abasement,  must 
all  be  swallowed  up  in  the  amplitude  of  the  signification  and 
power  of  grace.  I  may  call  creation  a  pastime,  if  I  call  grace 
a  work  ;  or  if  you  will  call  creation  a  work,  then  I  must  call 
grace  His  strange  work,  His  peerless  and  surpassing  work. 
The  one  is  but  as  the  formless  chaos,  upon  whose  heaving 
disorder  and  restless  strife  the  glorious  attributes  of  grace  are 
to  be  engraven  for  ever,  in  the  order  and  beauty  and  blessed- 
ness of  an  eternal  and  unchangeable  world. 

Of  this  most  gracious  act  of  the  Father,  to  suspend  His 
love  of  His  only-begotten  Son,  the  image  of  Himself,  the 
fulness  of  His  own  perfections ;  and  to  suffer  Him  to  come 
into  the  sorest   tribulation  and  most  perilous   risk;  yea,  to 


3i8  THE  INCARNATION : 

arm  His  right  hand   with  the    sword  of  His  wrath  against 
Him,  as  one  accursed  ; — of  this  act  of  the  Godhead,  I  say,  the 
boundless  range  and  immense  wealth  of  grace  could  never 
have  been  known,  nor  believed,  but  by  the  reducing  of  it  into 
act,  and  shewing  it  out  in  the  very  fact  of  the  incarnation  of 
the  Eternal  Word  ;  wherein  the  mystery  of  grace  becometh 
manifest,  and  the  contemplation  of  it  possible,  though  the 
comprehension  of  it  be  utterly  beyond  our  reach.     "  Sacrifice 
and   offering   thou   wouldest    not" — no    created    thing,  nor 
aught  that  by  creation  could  be  produced,  was  of  any  avail  : 
grace  came  not  under  that  type  at  all,  and  hath  no  relation 
thereto  whatever,   "  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands 
of  rams,  or  with  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?"     No,   nor 
with  all  the  creatures  that  came  forth  out  of  nothing  by  the 
power  of  the  creating  Word.     "  Shall  I  give  my  first-born  for 
my  transgression  ?  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my 
soul  ?"     It  were  of  no  avail.    What  then  }    "  He  hath  shewed 
thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  :  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of 
thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly 
with  thy  God  .?"     He  requireth  a  man,  a  perfect  man,  a  just, 
holy,  and  humble  man.     This  is  what  will  please  Him  :  give 
it,  if  thou  canst :  but  nothing  less  ;  not  by  a  jot  or  tittle  ;  for 
heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away  sooner  than  He  will  relin- 
quish one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  law.     There  is  no  sacrifice  for 
a  wilful  sin  :  a  sin  of  the  spirit  cannot  be  made  up  for  by 
any  bodily  gift   or  visible  offering  ;  no,   not  by  the  round 
globe  and    infinite  universe.     A  man,    a  perfectly  obedient 
man,  a  man   at   all   points  commensurate   with   the  law  of 
God's  most  holy  will:  that  will  do.     But  this  was  impossible  ; 
"  for  all  had  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God." 
Yea,  and  there  never  could  be  such  a  thing  as  that  a  crea- 
ture, come  forth  out  of  the  all-comprehensive  womb  of  the 
Word  into  outward  being,  should  stand  there  otherwise  than 
under  the  decree  of  election  ;  which  arresteth  the  decay  of 
certain  ones,  in  expectation  of,  and  I  may  say  under  condition 
of,  Him  that  was  to  come  and  stand   outwardly  as  a  man. 
The  Word  himself  must  take  a  body ;  the  Second  Person  of 
the  Divinity  must  go  out,  and  outward  stand  or  fall.     This  is 
grace,  for  the  essential  Godhead  to  take  a  body.     The  will- 


ITS  FRUITS. 


319 


ingness  to  do  so,  saveth  us  and  all  who  believe.  "  By  the 
which  Will  we  are  sanctified,  by  the  offering  of  the  body  of 
Christ."  That  act  of  obedience,  written  in  these  words  of  the 
40th  Psalm,  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  :  in  the  volume  of  thy 
book  it  is  written  of  me,  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God  ; 
yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart,"  is  the  redemption  of  the 
fallen,  is  the  ransom  of  the  elect,  is  the  satisfaction  of  the 
law,  is  the  manifestation  of  grace,  is  the  fulness  of  love,  is  the 
stability  and  blessedness  of  all  things  :  for  which  God  sus- 
pended His  wrath  at  the  fall  of  Adam,  and  hath  borne  with 
the  wickedness  of  man  until  this  day  ;  because  His  Son  had 
said  that  word,  "  Lo,  I  come  ;"  because  the  Godhead  is  gra- 
cious, and  was  pleased  to  reveal  its  grace,  which  could  not  be 
otherwise  revealed.  And  as  the  first  act  of  offering  or  dedi- 
cation was,  so  was  every  act  of  the  fulfilment  and  accomplish- 
ment thereof  Every  act  of  Christ's  incarnation  was  an  act  of 
self-emptying  and  man-fulfilling ;  wherein  the  Godhead  was 
quiescent,  if  I  may  so  speak,  that  the  humanity  might  be 
wholly  active  ;  the  Divinity  suspending  itself,  that  the  huma- 
nity, supported  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  might  endure  the  weight 
of  the  offended  holiness  and  justice  of  God.  There  were  pre- 
sent, in  every  act,  both  the  Divine  and  human  natures ;  the 
Divine  nature  restraining  its  power,  and  might,  and  glory, 
that  the  man,  that  the  servant,  that  He  who  "  was  made  sin 
for  us  who  knew  no  sin,"  that  He  who  was  "  made  a  curse  for 
us,"  might  in  everything  act,  and  suffer,  and  endure.  So  that, 
as  the  divines  say,  His  Divinity  was  the  passive  golden  altar 
whereon  His  humanity  was  sacrificed  for  sin.  And  herein 
lies  the  twofold  character  of  every  act  of  Christ, — its  meri- 
toriousness,  in  that  His  Divinity  was  divested  in  order  that 
His  humanity  might  perform  it ;  its  imitableness,  in  that  His 
humanity  did  perform  it  through  the  sustenance  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  So  that,  what  grace  there  was  in  the  first  declaration, 
"  Lo,  I  come  :  a  body  hast  thou  prepared  for  me,"  there  was  in 
every  several  act ;  for  every  several  act  was  the  embodying, 
the  impersonifying  of  the  Divine  nature  in  that  particular 
act  of  manhood,  yea,  in  that  particular  penalty  of  fallen 
manhood  :  for  I  believe  literally,  as  the  apostle  literally 
writeth,  "  that  He  was  made  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin,  that 


320  THE  INCARNATION: 

we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  Now 
this  is  grace,  even  the  incarnation  of  the  Eternal  Word  :  and 
the  eternal  union  of  the  two  natures  is  the  monument  of  grace. 
Of  which,  let  me  say  again  and  again,  and  for  ever  say  it,  that 
the  measure  thereof  is  impossible,  and  the  estimate  incom- 
prehensible, and  shall  remain  so  for  ever.  But  we,  who  are 
drawn  up  into  its  blessed  fellowship  by  the  Spirit,  shall  drink 
of  the  exhaustless  rivers  of  His  grace,  and  so  shall  all  the 
election  and  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus. 

And,  touching  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  mani- 
fested in  the  sustaining  of  the  humanity  of  Christ  ;  in  bring- 
ing Him  into  the  condition  of  humanity  ;  in  the  construction 
of  that  body  unto  which  He  did  wed  Himself  for  ever  ; 
and  in  the  empowering  of  it  to  endure  the  extremity  of  the 
Father's  wrath,  and  the  load  of  every  sin  whereto  flesh  and 
blood  are  obnoxious.  For  I  believe,  and  will  ever  affirm,  ac- 
cording to  the  language  of  all  the  psalms,  that  the  body  of 
Christ,  which  was  without  spot  and  blemish,  had  yet  inherent 
in  it,  and  resting  upon  it,  every  form  of  infirmity,  and  was 
liable  to  every  description  of  sin  ;  was  led  into  all  temptation ; 
yet  was  not  prevailed  against,  but  could  always  say,  "  It  is  no 
more  I,  but  sin  present  in  me  and  around  me  and  on  every 
side  of  me,  but  never  able  to  oversway  my  holy  will,  or, 
rather,  not  mine,  but  my  Father's:"  for  He  said  upon  one 
occasion,  "Not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  done:"  which  word 
teaches  us  that  there  was  a  will  of  the  flesh  always  soliciting 
Him,  and,  as  I  judge,  far  more  violently  than  any  other  man; 
which  the  almighty  will  of  the  Spirit,  the  perfect  obedience 
of  the  Son  of  man.  His  undismayed  faith.  His  unwearied 
prayer.  His  strong  cryings  and  tears,  did  enable  Him  to 
restrain  during  the  appointed  period  of  His  incarnation.  All 
sins,  infirmities,  and  diseases  had  free  access  to  Him  by  the 
way  of  His  humanity :  they  nestled  in  it,  but  could  not 
pollute  it ;  they  begirt  it  on  every  side,  but  could  not  dis- 
may it ;  they  straitened,  tortured,  and  slew  it,  but  could  not 
bring  it  under  the  dominion  of  sin  for  one  instant ;  and 
did  but  slay  themselves,  in  slaying  that  body  into  which  they 
had  entered  to  make  war  upon  the  spirit  which  dwelt  therein 
so  that,  according  as  it  is  written,  "  He  condemned  sin  in  the 


ITS  FRUITS.  321 

flesh,"  "He  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  upon  the  tree:" 
and,  taking  away  the  substance  of  all  fleshly  sin,  He  took 
away  the  carnal  ceremonies  and  ordinances  of  the  law  which 
made  continual  remembrance  of  them,  nailing  them  to  His 
cross,  AH  this  He  did  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ; 
because  God  was  with  Him ;  because  the  Father  was  in  Him 
by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  because  the  humanity,  sustained  of  the 
Spirit,  as  by  the  Spirit  it  was  formed,  was  able  to  receive  and 
unite  itself  to  the  Divinity,  through  all  the  perilous  voyage, 
from  the  nativity  to  the  resurrection,  or  rather  to  the  ascen- 
sion and  installation  in  glory :  when  the  Holy  Spirit,  having 
accomplished  this  most  momentous  and  perilous  act  of  in- 
carnate grace,  did  descend  to  the  earth  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost, in  order  to  do  for  the  rest  of  the  elect  that  which  He 
had  done  for  the  first-born  of  the  family,  the  first-begotten 
from  the  dead. 

Such,  dear  brethren,  I  conceive  to  be  the  true  account  of 
that  fulness  of  grace  which  was  exhibited  to  outward  obser- 
vation in  the  person  and  work  of  Christ  Jesus,  our  ever- 
blessed  Lord.  And  as  to  Him  is  the  origin  of  the  gift  due, 
so  to  Him  also,  and  to  Him  alone,  pertaineth  the  honour  of 
having  manifested  it.  The  Father  declareth  nothing  of  Him- 
self, as  Father,  but  by  the  Son  :  and  the  Son  doeth  nothing  of 
Himself,  but  by  the  Father.  Nevertheless,  it  were  greatly  to 
misrepresent  the  truth  to  say  that,  though  there  was  no  open 
revelation  before  the  advent  of  Christ,  there  were  no  indica- 
tions and  promises  and  unequivocal  significations  of  this  grace, 
which  was  about  to  come :  for  even  from  the  beginning, 
when  man  fell,  Christ  began  to  be  preached,  and  the  effects 
of  this  preaching  began  to  be  felt.  Nay,  I  will  go  further, 
and  say,  that  fallen  man,  and  all  the  creation  which  fell  with 
him,  are  a  dim  manifestation  of,  and  do  make  a  continual 
endeavour  to  reveal  the  Christ ;  that,  all  burdened  and  op- 
pressed with  sin  as  the  creation  hath  become,  and  all  unworthy 
to  declare  its  Creator's  being  and  attributes,  it  hath  yet  in 
itself  the  promise,  and  putteth  forth  the  desire,  of  a  higher 
and  holier  condition  yet  to  be.  Wherein  consisteth  its  burden, 
that  it  cannot  be  what  it  would  be:  it  is  struggling  after 
something  better.  It  would  deposit  its  load,  but  it  cannot. 
VOL.  V.  X 


32  2  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

It  all  waited,  and  waiteth  still,  for  the  coming  of  Christ ;  for 
whom  it  is  a  silent  witness,  and  of  whom  it  is  a  patient  ex- 
pectant. Which  the  troubled  condition  of  the  abject  creature 
to  comfort,  and  to  re-establish  the  peace  of  all  things,  is  the 
second  fruit  and  benefit  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God : 
that  peace  which  grace  worketh  in  the  sinful  creature.  But 
rightly  to  understand  this  peace,  which  the  earth  hath  derived 
from  Christ,  it  will  be  necessary  to  look  back  to  the  beginning 
of  the  trouble  and  distress. 

2.  The  origin  of  all  trouble  and  disorder  within,  as  of  all 
trouble  and  disorder  without,  is  to  be  found  in  the  sinful  con- 
dition into  which  man  and  his  habitation  have  been  brought 
by  the  fall.  For  it  is  of  the  nature  of  God  to  create  all 
things  perfect  and  blessed  in  their  kind  ;  and  we  certainly 
know  that  man  was  so  created,  and  the  dominion  over  which 
he  ruled.  There  was  no  breach  of  peace  amongst  all  the 
creatures  over  whom  he  held  the  mastery,  nor  between  his 
wife  and  him,  nor  between  God  and  his  living  soul,  nor  among 
the  elements  of  creation,  nor  anywhere  within  all  the  bounds 
of  his  habitation.  Of  which  complete  and  perfect  blessedness 
that  we  may  have  some  idea,  hear  how  the  prophet  Ezekiel 
is  rapt  into  visions  of  glory  upon  a  mere  allusion  which  he 
makes  to  Eden,  for  the  sake  of  illustrating  the  glory  of  one 
whom  he  calleth  the  King  of  Tyrus :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God,  Thou  sealest  up  the  sum,  full  of  wisdom,  and  perfect  in 
beauty.  Thou  hast  been  in  Eden  the  garden  of  God  ;  every 
precious  stone  was  thy  covering,  the  sardius,  topaz,  and  the 
diamond,  the  beryl,  the  onyx,  and  the  jasper,  the  sapphire, 
the  emerald,  and  the  carbuncle,  and  gold  :  the  workmanship 
of  thy  tabrets  and  of  thy  pipes  was  prepared  in  thee  in  the  day 
that  thou  Avast  created.  Thou  art  the  anointed  cherub  that 
covereth ;  and  I  have  set  thee  so :  thou  wast  upon  the  holy 
mountain  of  God  ;  thou  hast  walked  up  and  down  in  the 
midst  of  the  stones  of  fire.  Thou  wast  perfect  in  thy  ways 
from  the  day  that  thou  wast  created,  till  iniquity  was  found 
in  thee."  From  the  entering  of  sin  into  the  mind  of  man, 
whence  it  quickly  circulated  through  his  body,  and  unto  the 
creatures  his  body-servants,  and  over  the  earth  his  habitation, 
there  would  have  ensued  upon  him  all  the  wretchedness  and 


ITS  FRUITS.  323 

hopelessness  of  the  second  death,  upon  his  habitation  all  the 
barrenness  and  misery  of  the  lake  that  burncth,  had  it  not 
been  for  that  Sacrifice  which  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world  for  the  atonement  of  sin  ;  that  purpose,  which  God 
purposed  in  Himself  to  bring  in,  through  the  lowly  gate  of 
fallen  man,  the  Eternal  Ruler  and  Governor,  the  Lord  and 
Christ  of  the  universe.  But  for  this  there  would  have  remained 
to  us  no  ambition  of  better  things,  no  desire  of  things  unattain- 
able, nor  hope  of  things  possible,  nor  enjoyment  of  things 
blessed  upon  the  earth  :  all  would  have  been  flat,  remediless 
ruin,  and  iron  inflexibility  of  fate  :  and  more  speedy  than  the 
lightning,  and  more  wasteful  than  the  thunderbolt,  would  have 
come  the  execution  of  the  curse,  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest 
thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die."  Now,  seeing  that  it  came  not 
so  to  pass,  and  that  the  being  of  man  and  of  the  earth  hath 
been  sustained  in  some  measure  of  health  and  wealth,  in  con- 
sideration of  the  ofl'cring  which  was  to  be  rendered  for  that 
first  sin  and  for  all  its  issues,  we  ought  to  be  at  pains  to  con- 
sider the  condition  into  which  we  came,  and  the  point  of  fall 
at  which  we  were  arrested  in  our  passage  down  to  the  gulf  of 
the  second  death  ;  and  to  regard  it  not  only  as  derived  from, 
but  somehow  illustrative  of,  the  work  which  Christ  was  to 
accomplish  upon  the  earth.  For  I  believe  that  in  what  way 
the  promise,  "  The  Seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  ser- 
pent's head,"  did  prefigure  the  work  of  Christ  in  the  incarna- 
tion ;  so  the  condition  into  which  man  came,  being  by  virtue 
of  that  promise  detained  from  falling  farther,  doth  shadow 
forth  in  the  same  degree  that  condition  into  which  the  incar- 
nation of  Christ  was  to  bring  His  Church ;  and  in  which  we 
now  do  actually  stand,  waiting  the  restoration  of  the  earth  to 
some  better  and  more  blessed  estate  than  that  from  which  it 
fell.  For  it  is  a  vain  thing  to  go  about  to  describe  the  state 
of  Adam  and  his  fallen  race  as  a  state  of  pure  devilishness 
and  hellish  misery ;  or  to  describe  the  state  of  the  Church  as 
a  state  of  angelic  rest  and  heavenly  blessedness :  which 
neither  of  them  is  ;  but  only  the  state  of  transition  to  the  one 
and  to  the  other  of  these  extreme  conditions  :  yea,  and  I  will 
add,  both  of  them  goodly  in  their  kinds,  derived  from  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ,  which  hath  not  only  virtue  to  sanctify  and 


324  THE  INCARNATION: 

bless  the  holy  place  of  the  spiritual  Church,  but  in  a  lower 
degree  also  the  outward  court  of  the  visible  Church  ;  and,  in  a 
lower  degree  still,  the  very  court  of  the  Gentiles,  or  the  whole 
world.  So  that' all  are  His  debtors;  "His  own,"  though  they 
know  it  not ;  His  own  by  salvation,  though  they  esteem  it  not. 
And  without  taking  into  consideration  the  nature  of  this  misery, 
which  Christ  removeth  from  the  soul  of  man,  you  shall  never 
be  able  to  render  any  right  account,  or  to  make  any  exact  dis- 
course concerning  the  peace  which  He  induceth  in  its  room. 

As  Adam  in  his  unfallen  state  was  a  type,  and  the  only 
perfect  type  of  Christ,  our  perfect  righteousness ;  so  Adam  in 
his  fallen  state,  and  all  fallen  men,  are  types  of  the  believer 
while  he  is  yet  warring  his  warfare  in  the  militant  Church : 
and  the  world  itself,  with  its  laws  and  ordinances  of  govern- 
ment, its  judges  and  courts  of  justice,  and  royal  seat  of  sove- 
reignty and  mercy,  is  a  type  ordained  of  God  to  shadow  forth 
the  conditions  of  the  Church,  and  the  nature  of  the  govern- 
ment through  which  God  is  conducting  her  to  eternal  and 
stable  blessedness.  When,  in  virtue  of  Christ's  sacrifice, 
man  was  arrested,  and  the  world  arrested,  from  instant 
perdition,  it  immediately  came  under  His  administration  ; 
and  hath  been  tempered  and  restrained  in  its  continual 
tendency  to  destruction  by  His  mighty  power,  for  the  one 
end  of  testifying  His  grace  and  of  educing  peace  from 
the  disorder  which  sin  had  introduced.  The  curse  which 
went  forth  upon  man  and  upon  woman,  and  upon  the 
ground  for  their  sakes,  not  being  the  curse  of  death  that  was 
threatened,  must  be  held  as  a  constitution  of  grace  and  mercy 
in  an  inferior  degree,  proportionate  to  the  inferior  light:  which 
should  hold  together,  and  be  made  the  basis  of  future  opera- 
tions of  the  Regenerator,  until  the  complete  resurrection  and 
life  should  be  educed,  and  established  for  ever.  Adam,  when 
he  had  fallen  out  of  his  creation  state,  was  immediately  placed 
under  the  constitution  of  the  gospel  by  the  promise — he,  and 
all  his  children  who  should  exercise  faith  and  hope  upon  Him 
that  was  to  come.  As  his  posterity  sinned  in  him,  and  fell 
with  him ;  so  were  they  in  him  caught  in  their  fall,  and 
strengthened  against  their  sin,  by  the  promise  of  Christ ;  and 
from  henceforth  they  sinned  against  that  Christ  whom  they 


ITS  FRUITS. 


J-D 


did  not  choose  to  keep  in  their  remembrance,  or  to  hand 
down  unto  their  children.     All  men  sin  in  the  way  of  infi- 
delity and  apostasy,  and  shall  be  judged  by  the  Christ  whose 
redeeming  promise  they  did  not  heed,  and  whose  preserva- 
tion from  the  curse  of  death  they  did    not   acknowledge  ; 
whose  gifts,    under   the   canopy  of   His   eternal   love,   they 
turned   against    Himself,   to    His    dishonour    and   dispraise. 
And  this,  which  was  left  in  man,  this  door  of  hope,  this  light 
of  reason,  and  consciousness  in  the  will  of  its  own  bondage, 
is  what  St  Paul  meaneth  when  he  saith  of  the  heathen,  in  the 
1st  chapter  of  the  Romans,   "  Because  that  which  may  be 
known  of  God  is  manifest  in  them  ;  for  God  hath  shewed  it 
unto  them:"  and  again:  "When  the  Gentiles,  which  have 
not  the  law,  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law, 
these,  not  having  the  law,  are  a  law  unto  themselves  ;  which 
shew  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their  hearts  ;  their  con- 
science also  bearing  them  witness,  and  their  thoughts  the 
meanwhile  accusing,  or  else  excusing  one  another."     If  they 
call  this  the  light  of  nature,  let  it  be  understood  that  it  is  the 
licfht  which  is  manifested  in  the  reason  and  will  of  man  in 
spite  of  the  darkness  of  nature  ;  and  know  that  all  the  trouble 
and  despair  from  which  Christ  educeth  peace,  cometh  of  this 
very  controversy  which  there  is  between  the  freedom  of  a 
spirit  and  the  powers  of  nature  which  lie  with  heavy  oppres- 
sion upon  its  breast. 

There  is  a  light  in  the  darkness,  a  light  shining  in  the 
darkness,  which  the  darkness  never  comprehendeth ;  which 
light  is  the  free  gift  of  Christ  :  according  to  that  word  of  the 
Gospel  of  John,  "  He  is  the  true  light  which  lighteth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world  ;"  and  this  is  the  light  of 
reason,  which  all  men  should  have  kept  as  the  lamp  of  God, 
trimming  it  with  the  oil  of  His  revealed  will,  and  waiting  for 
the  arising  of  the  day-star  and  the  dawning  of  the  day  upon 
their  heart.  And  because  the  virgins  have  been  more  foolish 
than  to  trim  their  lamps,  and  expect  the  Bridegroom,  they 
will  be  judged  at  His  coming,  every  one  of  them,  and  re- 
jected from  the  heavenly  and  eternal  state  of  His  blessed- 
ness. And,  further,  because  the  light  of  Christ  in  man  would 
have  been  unprofitable  without  an  outward  object  in  which  it 


326  THE  INCARNATION : 

might  exercise  itself,  I  said  that  the  creation,  all  fallen  as  it 
is,  is  pregnant  with  a  birth,  and  gives  signs  to  the  en- 
lightened of  a  travailing  sorrow.  It  was  arrested  on  its 
course  to  death,  and  stayed  in  that  condition  in  which 
we  behold  it,  and  there  constituted  in  a  state,  not  of 
paradise,  and  not  of  death,  but  between  the  two  ;  which 
seemed  to  Him  the  fittest  to  be  made  the  basis  of  that  re- 
demption which  He  is  to  bring  out  of  it  by  the  washing  of 
water  and  the  purification  of  fire.  And  to  this  agree  the 
words  of  Paul,  in  the  same  place  :  "  For  the  invisible  things 
of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being 
understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal 
power  and  Godhead  :  so  that  they  are  without  excuse ;  be- 
cause that,  when  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not  as 
God,  neither  were  thankful,  but  became  vain  in  their  imagina- 
tions, and  their  foolish  hearts  were  darkened.  ,  .  .  And 
even  as  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge, 
God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind.  .  .  .  Who 
knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such 
things  are  worthy  of  death,  not  only  do  the  same,  but  have 
pleasure  in  them  that  do  them."  This  language  were  not 
proper  to  be  spoken  of  the  heathen,  if  they  had  not  been  in 
a  state  of  apostasy  from  a  religion  which  belonged  unto  all 
men,  and  had  its  constant  ground  in  the  fallen  constitution  of 
man,  and  its  constant  object  in  the  fallen  constitution  of 
things.  It  is  just  the  language  which  we  could  take  up  at 
present,  and  use  of  the  Papal  apostasy  ;  and  which  Paul, 
looking  at  it  prophetically,  doth  use  of  it,  saying,  "That  it 
shall  come  in  the  power  of  Satan,  with  all  deceivableness  of 
unrighteousness  in  them  that  perish,  because  they  received 
not  the  love  of  the  truth  that  they  might  be  saved.  And  for 
this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they 
should  believe  a  lie :  that  they  all  might  be  damned,  who 
believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness." 
I  am  borne  out,  therefore,  and  sustained  by  Scripture,  when  I 
say  that  the  condition  at  which  God  arrested  the  fall  of  man's 
soul,  and  of  the  creatures,  and  to  which  He  made  known  a 
revelation  of  redemption  to  come,  ritually  represented  in 
sacrifices  of  blood  and  offerings  of  all  manner  of  increase,  was 


ITS  FRUITS.  327 

a  germinating-  Christianity,  a  church  constitution,  a  ray  of 
light  in  the  spirit,  and  a  Divine  subject  of  knowledge  in  the 
visible  creation. 

In  order  to  perfect  this  testimony  to  the  coming  Christ, 
which  all  creation,  even  in  its  fall,  was  constituted  to  bear,  it 
was  necessary  to  separate  the  good  from  the  evil  by  a  dis- 
tinct ordinance  of  God : — hence  the  origin  of  a  revealed  law. 
And  this  must  not  be  confined  to  the  conscience  of  man,  as 
if  that  alone  were  fallen,  but  must  extend  itself  over  all  the 
creatures  : — whence  the  origin  of  a  law  of  clean  and  unclean  : 
not  that  anything  was  clean  ;  but  when  all  was  unclean,  this 
was  the  only  way  of  testifying  the  uncleanness  of  any.  It 
was  necessary  to  shew  the  defilement  of  nature  in  all  her 
courses,  whether  dependent  or  independent  upon  the  will  of 
man : — hence  the  Levitical  purifyings  and  offerings  for  un- 
cleanness. And  in  order  that  this  testimony  might  be  both 
constant  and  conspicuous  to  all  the  earth,  it  was  necessary  to 
separate  a  particular  nation  for  the  very  end  of  maintaining 
it : — hence  the  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile.  All  this 
was  done  in  preparation  for,  and  in  expectation  of.  Him  that 
was  to  come :  who,  being  come,  must  proceed  to  remove  the 
burden  and  bondage  thus  declared,  and  to  work  out  the  deli- 
verance and  pacification  of  the  world  from  this  thraldom  into 
which  it  had  come.  And  thus  we  are  brought  to  the  second 
part  of  our  subject,  which  is  the  peace  that  we  have  from  the 
incarnation  of  Christ. 

Now,  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  being  the  eternal 
and  consubstantial  union  of  the  two  natures,  human  and 
Divine,  in  one  person ;  as  it  is  the  embodying  of  the  grace  of 
the  Godhead,  and  the  presentation  of  it  to  the  acceptance  of 
man,  so  is  it  also  the  exemplification  and  the  assurance  of 
that  reconciliation  and  peace  which  we  have,  and  can  have 
only,  through  the  faith  of  this  very  doctrine,  that  the  Son  of 
God  is  come  in  the  flesh.  For  in  that  act  of  incarnation  we 
behold  the  nature  of  sinful,  fallen,  suffering  man  entering  into 
sweet  and  harmonious  union  with  the  sinless  nature  of  God  ; 
the  eternal  and  unchangeable  discordancy  which  there  is  be- 
tween the  sin  of  the  creature  and  the  holiness  of  the  Creator 
for  ever  harmonised ;   the  most  violent  of  all  contradictions 


v) 


2  8  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION 


reconciled  ;  and  a  door  of  hope,  yea,  and  of  assurance,  opened, 
which  no  power  shall  ever  shut.  That  the  body  of  our  Lord 
is  the  true  ground  of  all  peace,  is  manifest  from  what  St  Paul 
saith  in  this  epistle,  at  the  13th  verse  of  the  second  chapter: 
"But  now,  in  Christ  Jesus,  ye,  who  sqmetime  were  far  off,  are 
made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  For  he  is  our  peace,  who 
hath  made  both  one,  and  hath  broken  down  the  middle  wall 
of  partition  which  was  between  us  :  having  abolished  in  his 
flesh  the  enmity,  even  the  law  of  commandments  which  stood 
in  ordinances ;  for  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man, 
so  making  peace ;  and  that  he  might  reconcile  both  unto 
God  in  one  body  by  the  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  there- 
by ;  and  came  and  preached  peace  to  you  which  were  afar  off, 
and  to  them  which  were  nigh  :  for  through  him  we  both  have 
access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father."  There  are  three  ideas 
contained  in  this  passage,  all  of  which  must  enter  into  the 
integrity  of  the  peace  which  came  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  first. 
That  in  His  flesh,  by  the  offering  of  His  body  upon  the  cross, 
He  did  break  down  the  wall  of  separation  which  was  between 
Jew  and  Gentile,  and  make  them  one  :  which  is  thus  ex- 
pressed in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  (chap.  ii.  14) :  "  Blotting 
out  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us,  which 
was  contrary  to  us,  and  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to 
his  cross."  The  second  idea  is,  That  both  being  thus  recon- 
ciled to  one  another,  and  represented  as  united  in  His  one 
body,  He  did  reconcile  unto  God,  by  the  offering  of  His  body 
upon  the  cross.  This  idea  also  is  expressed  in  a  correspond- 
ing passage  of  the  Colossians,  (chap.  i.  20) :  "And,  having  made 
peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross,  by  him  to  reconcile  all 
things  to  himself:  by  him,  I  say,  whether  they  be  things  in 
earth  or  things  in  heaven :  And  you,  that  were  sometime 
alienated,  and  enemies  in  your  minds  by  wicked  works,  yet 
now  hath  he  reconciled,  in  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death, 
to  present  you  holy  and  unblameable  and  unreproveable  in 
his  sight."  The  third  idea  is.  That  out  of  the  reconciliation 
effected  by  the  offering  of  His  body  upon  the  cross  cometh 
the  preaching  of  peace  to  them  which  were  afar  off,  and  to 
them  which  are  nigh.  And  as  the  peace-speaking  act  of  the 
incarnation  and  sacrififce  of  Christ  is  the  beginning  of  all  peace. 


ITS  FRUITS.  329 

whether  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  or  between  God  and  man  ; 
so  must  faith  upon  the  former  precede  the  possession  of  the 
latter :  as  it  is  immediately  added,  in  that  passage  of  the  Co- 
lossians,  "  If  ye  continue  in  the  faith,  grounded  and  settled,  and 
be  not  carried  away  from  the. hope  of  the  gospel  which  ye 
have  heard  ;"  and  so  it  is  also  written  in  the  5th  chapter  of 
the  Romans:  "Therefore,  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have 
peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  That  the 
peace  which  we  partake  through  faith  in  the  incarnation  and 
offering  of  Christ,  is  purely  derived  from  Christ  as  a  Foun- 
tain ;  and  was  in  Him  first  realised  and  manifested  in  that 
wonderful  harmony  and  reunion  of  the  two  most  violent  con- 
traries, the  nature  of  fallen  man  and  the  nature  of  God  ;  is 
further  manifest  from  His  bequeathing  it  so  solemnly  :  "  Peace 
I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you."  And  in  the 
passage  quoted  above  He  is  called  "our  peace:"  and  in 
another  epistle  it  is  called,  "  The  peace  of  God  which  passeth 
all  understanding  :"  and  in  another  passage,  Christ's  ministry 
upon  earth  is  called  "preaching  peace;"  and  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  is  called  "  the  ministry  of  reconciliation,"  and  is 
summed  up  in  these  words  :  "  That  God  was  in  Christ  recon- 
ciling the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  unto  men  their 
trespasses."  These  ideas,  concerning  that  peace  with  which 
Christ  hath  blessed  the  troubled  estate  of  man,  I  would  now 
endeavour,  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  in  the  strength  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  to  open  in  order. 

I.  And  first,  concerning  the  reconciliation  or  peace  which  He 
made  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  or  concerning  the  taking 
away  of  that  natural  burden  of  all  things,  and  those  carnal 
ordinances  which  stood  in  meats  and  drinks  and  diverse 
washings,  and  were  ordained  until  the  time  of  reformation  ; 
I  have  to  observe,  that  these  were  but  the  rudiments  of  the 
body  of  Christ,  or  the  elements  of  the  flesh  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  They  are  called  "weak  and  beggarly  elements;" 
and  amongst  them  are  included,  not  only  the  ceremonies  and 
ordinances  of  the  Jewish  worship,  but  also  "  philosophy  and 
vain  conceit,  after  the  traditions  of  men,  after  the  rudiments 
or  elements  of  this  world  ;"  unto  all  which  he  saith,  in  an- 
other place,  that  "  we  are  dead  with  Christ."     In  this  con- 


330  THE  INCARNATION: 

junction  of  the  traditions  of  the  fathers  on  the  one  hand,  with 
the  institutions  of  the  Jews  on  the  other,  and  their  removal 
out  of  the  way  by  the  Cross,  there  is  a  greater  mystery  in- 
volved than  is  generally  supposed, — even  the  mystery,  touched 
upon  above,  that  all  which  had  come  before  unto  the  patri- 
archs and  the  prophets,  of  ritual  and  formal  observances,  was 
but  a  preparation  for,  and  as  it  were  the  materials  of,  Christ's 
fleshly  body,  which  was  offered  up  on  the  cross,  and  by  the 
resurrection  transformed  into  the  body  of  glory  which  now 
sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  The  whole  painful  and 
burdensome  ceremonial  of  religion,  that  heavy  yoke  "  which 
neither  we  nor  our  fathers  were  able  to  bear,"  was  the  preg- 
nancy and  pangs  of  the  mother,  until  the  child  should  be 
born :  which  child  being  born,  the  body  of  the  child  being 
completed,  and  brought  to  the  light  of  day,  all  was  accom- 
plished ;  and  the  elements  in  which  its  ante-natal  being  had 
been  preserved,  having  fulfilled  their  purpose,  were  of  no  further 
use,  were  good  for  nothing,  whether  they  existed  in  the  Jewish 
ceremonial  or  in  the  heathen  traditions.  When  the  Word  had 
been  made  flesh,  when  the  Son  of  God  had  taken  to  Himself 
a  body,  the  whole  significance  of  these  ordinances  stood  in  that 
body,  and  the  burden  of  them  was  by  that  body  sustained. 
For  be  it  carefully  observed,  that  the  whole  Levitical  economy 
was  a  remembrance  of  obligation  and  of  sin  ;  recalling  ever 
to  mind  the  uncleanness  of  the  flesh,  the  daily  transgression, 
and  the  need  of  annual  atonement ;  and  shewing  the  obliga- 
tion of  every  possession,  that  it  was  not  ours  in  full  right,  but 
another's,  holden  by  us  upon  the  payment  of  a  certain  pro- 
portion and  the  fulfilment  of  a  certain  service.  This  was  the 
end  of  the  Levitical  institution,  and  indeed  of  the  Fall-consti- 
tution also ;  and  when  Christ's  body  was  manifested,  it  lay 
upon  that  body  to  sustain  the  whole  of  that  burden  which 
the  laborious  Levites  and  ceremonious  Jews,  and  of  that  also 
which  the  whole  creation  had  been  burdened  withal.  And 
not  any  more  in  the  figure,  but  in  the  reality,  in  very  deed 
and  in  very  truth  had  the  Lord  Jesus  to  sustain  in  His  body 
of  the  flesh  all  sins  for  which,  under  the  law,  sin-offerings 
were  wont  to  be  made ;  and  to  serve  all  services  for  which 
the  earth  was  holden  in  possession  ;  and  to  fulfil  all  obliga- 


ITS  FRUITS.  331 

tions  under  which  the  righteous  and  holy  nation  had  been 
put  until  the  substance  of  their  righteousness  and  holiness 
should  come.  These  were  all  the  memorials  of  an  account 
unsettled  between  God  and  man  ;  of  a  ransom  unpaid,  of  a 
captivity  unredeemed,  of  a  lordship  and  scigniority  which  He 
held  over  us  and  all  that  we  inherit.  But  now  unto  Christ's 
body  this  vassalage  was  all  transferred :  it  was  the  captive,  it 
was  the  slave ;  in  sign  of  which  it  is  said,  in  the  40th  Psalm, 
"  Mine  ear  hast  thou  bored  :"  it  was  the  beasts  of  atonement 
which  were  slain  without  the  camp  for  the  sin  of  the  whole 
nation,  and  for  the  purification  of  them  and  the  most  holy 
place.  Such  was  the  body  of  Christ,  burdened,  not  with  this 
man  or  that  man's  sin,  but  with  the  sins  of  the  flesh  and  of 
the  visible  world  in  the  abstract :  for  the  knowledge  and  con- 
tinual remembrance  of  which  the  Jewish  nation  had  been  put 
under  Levitical  priesthood.  Therefore  it  is  well  regarded  as 
bearing  our  sins,  and  being  the  propitiation,  not  only  for  our 
sins,  but  for  those  of  the  whole  world.  All  which,  divided 
between  the  holy  and  the  unholy  people,  between  Jew  and 
Gentile,  was  now  upon  Him ;  yea,  in  Him,  "  in  the  body  of 
His  flesh:"  He  bore  the  mighty  load. 

This  is  the  apostle's  idea  of  the  flesh  of  Christ  in  all  his 
epistles  :  which  having  laid  hold  of,  let  us  now  see  how  he 
maketh  it  serve  to  establish  peace  between  Jew  and  Gentile, 
between  the  holy  and  the  unholy,  between  God  and  man. 
He  thus  proceedeth :  This  body  of  His  flesh,  which  was  in- 
stinct with  every  form  of  sin,  (yet  Himself  sinless,)  which  was 
weakened  with  every  infirmity,  (yet  Himself  mightier  than 
the  mightiest,)  which  was  oppressed  with  every  obligation, 
(yet  Himself  under  no  obligation,  but  having  obligation  over 
all  things ;)  this  body,  thus  conditioned,  saith  the  apostle,  He 
took,  and  offered  on  the  cross  a  sacrifice  of  a  sweet-smelling 
savour :  and  there  He  offered  along  with  it  all  the  ordinances 
and  beggarly  elements  and  rudiments  of  the  world,  which 
were  nailed  to  the  cross  with  those  very  nails  that  nailed 
Him  to  that  accursed  tree ;  and  death  passed  upon  them, 
and  they  were  carried  to  the  grave  along  with  Him,  and 
did  they  rise  with  Him .''  Oh  no !  God  forbid  that  they 
should  rise  again !     He  rose,  but  He  rose  free  of  that  sinful 


332  THE  INCARNATION: 

wrapping  :  He  left  that  vile  cere-cloth  in  the  tomb.  "  Behold 
the  place  where  He  lay  :"  they  "saw  the  linen  clothesl  aid  by 
themselves."  He  arose  with  the  body  of  His  glory.  There  is 
a  likeness  of  His  death  and  there  is  a  likeness  of  His  resur- 
rection ;  but  these  are  not  the  same  likeness  :  for  in  the  former 
we  are  now  planted,  and  in  the  latter  we  are  hereafter  to  be 
raised.  Now  our  Christ  and  our  Lord,  whom  we  worship,  is 
not  the  dead,  but  the  risen  Christ ;  and  the  body  which  we 
are  of,  is  not  the  body  that  was  crucified,  but  the  body  that 
is  risen.  The  baptism  which  we  are  baptized  with,  in  order 
to  enter  His  Church,  is  a  baptism  unto  death,  and  a  burial 
with  Him,  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by 
the  glory  of  the  Father,  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life. 
And  so  far  forth  as  we  are  of  His  Church — that  is,  so  far  forth 
as  we  are  in  the  Spirit — we  are  the  fruits  of  His  death,  and 
wrought  upon  by  the  might  of  His  resurrection.  It  is  no 
longer  a  fleshly  Church,  but  it  is  a  resurrection  Church  ;  whose 
first  beginning  is  laid  in  baptism,  signifying  our  burial  with 
Him  ;  "  not  only  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but 
also  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God;"  "not 
only  the  washing  of  the  body  with  pure  water,  but  the  purg- 
ing of  the  conscience  from  dead  works,  that  we  should  serve 
the  living  God."  And  if  so  be  then  that  the  Pentecostal 
Church — that  is,  the  Church  of  the  first-fruits  of  the  harvest 
which  sprang  from  that  grain  of  corn  which  fell  into  the  earth 
— be  not  a  Church  holding  of  the  fleshly  body  of  Christ, 
which  bare  away  all  those  ceremonial  distinctions  of  clean 
and  unclean,  of  holy  and  unholy,  of  Jew  and  Gentile ;  but 
holding  of  the  risen  body  of  Christ,  and  begotten  by  the 
power  of  the  resurrection — which  body  was  clear  from  all 
those  defilements,  and  free  from  all  those  incumbrances,  when, 
*'  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,"  He  was  gloriously  and 
powerfully  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  and  Lord  of  all ; — 
then  see  ye  not  that  we  know,  and  can  know,  no  distinction 
of  Jew  or  Gentile,  Scythian,  bond  or  free,  male  or  female, 
circumcised  or  uncircumcised,  but  are  one  and  alike  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who  hath  abolished  all  distinctions,  and  taken  all  divi- 
sions of  men  from  men  clean  away.  "  He  is  our  peace,  who 
hath  made  both  one,  and  hath  broken  down  the  middle  wall 


ITS  FRUITS.  333 

of  partition  which  was  between  us ;  having  abolished  in  his 
flesh  the  enmity,  even  the  law  of  commandments  that  stood 
in  ordinances  ;  for  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man, 
so  making  peace." — This  I  take  to  be  the  true  account  of  the 
first  part  of  the  mystery  of  Christ's  peace-making. 

That  this  was  the  true  apostolical  doctrine  of  the  harmony 
and  peace  of  Christ's  Church,  is  manifest  from  the  very  errors 
into  which  it  fell.  The  error  of  Hymeneus  and  Philetus,  and 
the  believers  in  the  primitive  times,  was,  "  that  the  resurrec- 
tion is  past  already  ;"  that  is,  the  first  resurrection,  or  the 
resurrection  of  the  just — which  no  believer  in  the  primitive 
age  conceived  to  be  at  the  same  time  with  the  universal  resur- 
rection ;  for  how  then  could  they  have  said  it  was  past 
already,  when  they  saw  that  the  graves  were  still  possessed  of 
their  dead,  and  death  continually  taking  the  living  '^  The  very 
form  of  the  heresies  of  those  days  shew  what  was  the  form 
of  their  sound  doctrine.  Now  these  men,  misusing  the  doc- 
trine laid  down  above,  that  the  spiritual  Church  is  the  first- 
fruits  of  Christ's  resurrection,  and  essentially  holdeth  of  the 
life  of  the  resurrection  ;  misapprehending  and  misapplying 
this  truth,  they  said,  "Oh,  then,  that  peculiar  resurrection 
which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus  is  already  passed  upon  us,  who 
have  been  baptized  into  His  Church,  and  have  received  the 
Holy  Ghost:  we  are  therefore  in  the  New-Jerusalem  state, 
and  may  take  our  fill  of  all  enjoyment,  and  enter  into  the 
Millennium,  in  which  is  promised  an  hundredfold  of  all  those 
objects  of  sensual  gratification  which  we  have  forsaken."  Ex- 
actly parallel  to  this  is  the  notion  which  now  prevails  among 
many  of  the  faithful,  that  our  regeneration,  or  baptism  of  the 
Spirit,  is  our  peculiar  resurrection,  the  resurrection  promised 
by  our  Lord  in  these  words,  "  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now 
is,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  ; 
and  they  that  hear  shall  live  ;"  and  prophesied  of  in  the  Apo- 
calypse under  the  name  of  the  "  first  resurrection."  From 
which  notion  I  perceive  the  same  mischief  to  be  fast  proceed- 
ing as  was  produced  in  the  primitive  times.  For  if  the  Mil- 
lennium were  no  more  than  the  life  of  the  regenerate,  then 
the  life  of  the  regenerate  ought  to  be  the  life  of  the  Millen- 
nium, when  "they  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage, 


334  THE  INCARNATION: 

but  are  as  the  angels  of  God."  And  though  such  fruits  as 
were  revealed  in  the  first  ages  have  not  yet  come  out  of  this 
fallacy,  I  perceive  daily  the  gradual  growth  of  them.  That 
rest  and  quietism  which  mark  the  inward  experience  of  these, 
so  that  they  have  no  wrestlings  of  spirit,  nor  great  searchings 
of  heart ;  that  thirst  of  society,  which  hath  constituted  them 
into  a  world  by  themselves ;  that  ambition  of  high  and  noble 
names  and  distinctions ;  that  thirst  for  large  and  vast  enter- 
prises ;  and  much  more  which  savoureth  of  a  state  of  fruition, 
rather  than  a  state  of  denial ;  a  state  of  victory  and  triumph, 
rather  than  a  state  of  militancy,  shew  me  the  growth  of  the 
same  effects  which  heretofore  in  the  primitive  times  flowed 
from  this  dangerous  error,  that,  because  we  hold  of  the  power 
of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  therefore  we  have  been  partakers 
of  the  resurrection  already.  The  true  answer  to  which  is,  the 
resurrection  is  the  resurrection,  and  the  new  birth  is  the  new 
birth  :  the  resurrection  appertaineth  to  the  body,  and  the  new 
birth  appertaineth  to  the  Spirit,  and  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 
Resurrection  must  take  place  after  the  body  is  dead,  the 
second  birth  must  take  place  after  the  first  birth ;  the  one 
hath  reference  to  a  death  before  it,  the  other  only  to  a  birth 
before  it.  It  is  just  such  another  abuse  of  words  which  makes 
these  same  mystics  talk  of  Christ's  kingdom  to  come  being  a 
spiritual  kingdom.  And  the  answer  is  still  the  same : — Keep 
words  to  their  proper  use  :  if  you  mean  by  spiritual  kingdom, 
power  in  the  Spirit,  I  have  it  now,  and  so  hath  every  one  that 
is  born  of  God;  and  the  apostles  had  it  as  much  as  I  have  it ; 
and  nobody  shall  ever  have  more  of  it  than  was  given  at  Pente- 
cost. But  I  find  something  promised  under  the  name  of  power, 
and  kingdom,  and  government  upon  the  earth.  Now  I  know 
well  what  power  and  kingdom  and  government  is,  and  that  I 
have  no  inheritance  in  it  at  present,  but  am  made  subject 
unto  it  for  conscience'  sake,  am  under  its  yoke  and  oppres- 
sion ;  and  Christ  is  not  in  it,  but  the  devil  and  Antichrist. 
And  this  I  am  promised  to  possess  in  addition  to  that  which 
I  now  possess  :  wherefore,  believing  words  to  mean  in  Scrip- 
ture what  they  mean  elsewhere,  I  will  expect  it,  let  you  spi- 
ritualists and  mystics  say  what  you  please.  Even  so  this 
first  resurrection,  which  ye  have  made  no  epoch,  nor  event, 


ITS  FRUITS.  335 

nor  visible  thing  at  all,  but  resolved  into  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  to  beget  sons  unto  God,  I  do  and  will  expect,  and 
assure  myself  of,  as  a  mystery  quite  different  from  the  new 
birth,  and  a  hope  in  reserve  for  those  who  have  received  the 
former.  I  am  baptized  into  my  Lord's  death  and  burial,  and 
thence  have  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  sealed  upon  me ;  and  the 
life  which  I  live  thereupon  is  by  the  power  of  His  resurrec- 
tion ;  and  He  liveth  in  me,  and  in  all  His  Church,  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Still  we  bear  about  with  us  the  body  of  sin  and 
death,  which  is  under  the  law  of  the  flesh ;  but  we  have,  in 
virtue  of  the  new  birth,  a  law  of  the  Spirit,  which  warreth 
against  the  law  of  the  flesh  and  overcometh  it ;  and  in  which, 
if  we  were  perfected,  we  should  be  without  sin,  completely 
restraining  and  overcoming  the  law  of  the  flesh ;  and  we 
might  say,  with  Paul,  to  those  motions  of  wickedness  in  the 
flesh  to  which  we  were  conscious,  yet  not  consenting,  "  It  is 
no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me."  Now  this 
is,  to  my  apprehension,  the  exact  condition  of  our  Lord's 
being  from  His  baptism,  when  He  was  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  His  flesh  was  liable  to  all  temptations,  to  all  sinful 
assaults  and  invasions ;  He  knew.  He  felt  the  whole  power 
and  might  of  Satan  and  sin  ;  in  this  field  they  came  and 
went  most  freel}',  and  by  all  stripes,  strokes,  and  cruel  inflic- 
tions of  every  kind,  and  cunning  devices,  and  subtle  addresses, 
sought  access  to  His  will,  to  His  mind  ;  but  His  will  con- 
sented not,  never  consented,  never  shifted  its  steady  position 
towards  God,  and  its  steadfast  obedience  to  all  His  decrees ; 
and  so  was  He  sinless  and  spotless  in  Himself;  a  worthy,  a 
most  worthy  sacrifice  in  the  humanity,  though  He  bare  our 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  though  He  was  made  sin 
for  us  who  knew  no  sin.  And  thus  being  in  the  likeness  of 
sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  the  Son  of  God,  by  His  holy  life  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh,  and  by  His  death  triumphed  over  it, 
and  all  the  principalities  and  dominions  which  it  had  usurped. 
Even  as  Paul  saith,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  (chap.  ii. 
15,)  "And  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made 
a  shew  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it." 

Now,  exactly  so  are  we  conditioned  from  our  baptism  to 
our  resurrection,  as  He  from  His  baptism  to  His  resurrection 


^  x6  THE  INCARNA  TION : 


30 


was  conditioned.  We  bear  about  with  us  the  body  of  sin  and 
death,  judged  of  Christ,  and  brought  into  captivity  to  the 
Spirit ;  which  dwelling  in  us,  restraineth  it,  and  holding  it 
captive,  and  triumpheth  over  it,  to  the  glory  of  God  and  of 
His  Christ.  Which  act  of  the  new  life  proceedeth  from  His 
resurrection,  and  also  precedeth  our  resurrection  ;  even  as 
Christ's  life  of  the  like  kind  preceded  His  resurrection  :  for 
with  Him  we  must  be  humbled,  if  with  Him  we  would 
reign :  we  must  go  about  with  Him  doing  good,  and  un- 
doing Satan's  evil  deeds,  if  with  Him  we  would  rise  again, 
and  reign,  and  be  presented  faultless  in  the  presence  of  the 
Father. 

I  am  aware  that  the  Famulists  and  Friends,  not  under- 
standing the  carnal  nature  of  those  ordinances  which  Christ 
took  out  of  the  way,  have  dared,  upon  the  strength  of  such 
passages  as  those  quoted  above,  to  exaggerate  this  idea,  and 
to  maintain  that  the  observation  of  the  Sabbath,  and  the 
ordinances  of  public  worship,  and  the  preaching  of  the  Word, 
yea,  and  the  stated  reading  of  it,  and  the  very  sacraments  also, 
are  done  away  with  by  the  crucifixion  of  the  body  of  Christ- 
And  I  would  say  the  same,  if  they  could  shew  me  that  these 
were  Levitical  ordinances,  or  that  they  are  fleshly  ordinances  ; 
but  as  every  one  of  them  is  essentially  Christian  and  spiritual, 
having  a  reference  to  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the 
future  advent  of  the  Lord,  the  notion  cannot  for  a  moment 
be  maintained.  Baptism,  the  initiatory  rite  of  the  Church, 
signifies  the  putting  off"  the  carnal  observances  altogether,  and 
the  forsaking  of  the  flesh  itself;  and  declareth  that  everything 
which  is  observed  within  the  house,  of  which  it  is  the  entrance 
door,  is  not  carnal,  but  spiritual.  Prayer  and  praise  are  surely 
not  carnal,  but  spiritual  :  and  the  Word  of  God  is  the  sword 
of  the  Spirit :  and  the  foolishness  of  preaching  is  that  by 
which  God  is  pleased  to  save  them  that  believe:  and  the 
sacrament  of  the  Supper,  which  is  celebrated  in  remembrance 
of  Christ  until  He  shall  come  again,  is  the  standing  symbol  of 
our  union  with  Christ  by  the  Spirit,  and  pledge  of  our  right 
and  title  to  that  new  covenant,  whose  seal  shall  be  broken 
when  He  comes  again.  And  for  the  Sabbath,  it  was  insti- 
tuted in  man's  estate  of  blessedness,  and  is  neither  patriarchal 


JTS  FRUITS.  337 

nor  Levitical,  but,  like  marriage,  primeval  ;  and  therefore  not 
surely  to  be  put  off  and  on  at  pleasure  by  us,  to  whom  it  hath 
been  made,  not  only  primeval,  but  Christian,  by  the  Lord  of 
the  Sabbath-day,  who  hath  appointed  it  to  be  the  memorial 
of  His  own  resurrection,  when  He  arose  the  first-fruits  of  the 
regeneration  and  restoration  of  the  world.  These  institutions 
Christ  hath  appointed  to  signify  the  continual  presence  and 
abiding  of  His  invisible  Spirit  with  His  Church,  and  to  fore- 
shew  His  own  personal  presence  in  the  ages  to  come  ;  the 
signs  of  the  separate  and  elect  people,  the  helps  of  their  com- 
munion, and  the  tokens  whereby  the  world  may  know  the 
blessings  with  which  He  blesseth  them  :  to  make  His  Church 
an  outward  object  for  prophecy  and  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy, 
until  He  should  come  again.  These  ordinances  of  the  Church 
are  therefore  not  carnal,  but  spiritual ;  holding  not  of  the 
fleshly,  but  of  the  risen  body  of  Christ ;  looking  back,  not  to 
the  body  of  His  humility,  but  to  the  body  of  His  power  and 
glory.  And  they  are  as  necessary  to  a  Church  expectant  of 
a  second  advent,  as  the  Levitical  ordinances  were  necessary 
to  a  Church  expectant  of  a  first  advent.  And  it  is  neither 
safe  nor  dutiful,  no,  nor  is  it  permitted,  to  abolish  any  one  of 
them,  nor  to  add  to  any  one  of  them  ;  but  patiently,  yea,  and 
gladly,  as  the  means  of  grace  to  use  them,  until  by  His  glori- 
ous advent,  and  the  resurrection  of  His  Church,  He  shall  set 
forth  in  order  that  millennial  kingdom  for  which  we  look. 

Having  guarded  against  these  errors,  we  return  to  explain 
further  the  peace  which  is  brought  unto  us  in  the  incarnation 
of  Christ  Jesus. 

2.  The  same  offering  of  the  body  of  Christ  delivers  us  from 
all  which  stood  in  the  way  of  God's  favour  and  blessedness ; 
brings  us  nigh,  who  were  afar  off;  reconciles  us,  who  were 
enemies ;  and  introduceth  us  into  the  covenant,  who  were 
strangers  and  aliens  from  its  hope.  For  those  Levitical  and 
carnal  observances,  as  hath  been  said,  were  in  themselves 
nothing,  but  were  appointed  of  God  to  shew  the  holiness 
which  He  required  in  those  with  whom  He  entered  into 
covenant,  and  the  eternal  war  which  His  holiness  wageth 
with  the  sins  of  men.  The  Levitical  institution  condemned 
not  the  Jews  only,  but  men  in  general  ;  for  no  man  could 
VOL.  V.  Y 


33S  THE  INCARNATION: 

enter  into  covenant  with  God  otherwise  than  by  conforming 
himself  thereto.  It  was  therefore  a  token  to  the  whole  world 
of  their  inherent  wickedness  and  depravity  in  the  sight  of 
God  :  and  by  extending  and  particularly  applying  itself  to 
those  things  in  which  man  hath  no  will,  but  which  come  by 
the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  it  proved  that  nature  itself, 
that  the  animal  functions  of  the  creature — the  conception, 
and  the  birth,  and  the  whole  life  of  the  body  of  man — is 
under  the  bondage  of  an  inevitable  and  necessary  sinfulness  : 
and,  by  punishing  these  involuntary  acts  with  deprivations 
and  disgraces  manifold,  it  taught  the  true  nature  of  sin  and 
of  punishment, — that  they  are  essential  and  inseparable  from 
one  another,  and  that  guilt  is  determined  by  the  will  of  God, 
and  not  by  the  will  of  man.  And  by  punishing  man  in  his 
nature,  as  it  were,  rather  than  in  his  will,  it  shewed  that  the 
will  was  under  the  stern  bondage  of  intractable  nature  ;  under 
the  obstinate,  perverse  law  of  the  flesh  ;  and  could  not  be  re- 
covered otherwise  than  by  the  smiting,  judging,  and  destroy- 
ing of  that  flesh,  or  natural  man,  which  sin  had  made  its 
stronghold  ;  that  there  could  be  no  peace  between  the  Crea- 
tor and  the  creature  until  there  was  a  redemption  from  the 
power  of  that  natural  law,  which  had  overpowered  the  spi- 
ritual will  and  divine  purpose  under  which  the  creature  was 
formed  at  the  first.  And  this  is  further  shewn  out  to  my 
mind  by  God's  taking  the  lives  of  the  unconscious  brutes  ; 
and  taking  as  offerings  the  first-fruits  of  the  earth  in  her 
seasons  ;  as  if  He  would  smite  nature  in  her  four  corners, 
to  demonstrate  her  universal  and  consummate  wickedness ; — 
yea,  and  the  first-born  of  man  had  to  be  redeemed  with  an 
offering ;  and  the  Lord's  right  unto  every  child's  death  was 
marked  by  the  bloody  rite  of  circumcision  : — all  which  de- 
monstrated an  unextinguishable  variance  and  hatred  between 
the  creature  and  the  Creator,  between  nature  and  Spirit,  be- 
tween the  law  of  the  visible  creation  and  the  will  of  the  in- 
visible Creator.  And  he  who  believes  that  nature  is  any  way 
amended  by  the  course  of  time,  talks  like  a  fool  or  an  infidel : 
for,  as  the  mother  towards  her  delivery  is  more  burdened  and 
oppressed,  and  in  her  delivery  is  torn  asunder  with  awful  an- 
guish :  so  nature  grows  only  more  oppressive  upon  the  creation 


ITS  FRUITS.  339 

as  she  draweth  nearer  to  the  birth  and  the  manifestation  of 
the  sons  of  God  ;  in  the  act  and  article  of  which  she  shall  be 
rent  and  torn  up  to  her  very  centre.  To  talk  of  peace  to  any 
man,  therefore,  upon  any  grounds  whatever,  other  than  the 
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  is  the  greatest  of  all  false- 
hoods, being,  in  truth  and  verity,  the  denial  of  all  which  God 
hath  said  or  done  since  the  fall  of  man.  For  what  saith  the 
apostle  .''  "  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  to- 
gether until  now  :  and  not  only  they,  but  ourselves  also, 
which  have  received  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  our- 
selves groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to 
wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body."  Now,  it  is  to  be  under- 
stood from  all  the  Scripture,  and  indeed  isof  the  very  essence 
of  the  incarnation,  that  Christ  took  upon  Himself  the  burden 
of  this  fallen  nature,  and  bore  it  during  His  life,  and  carried 
it  to  His  death;  that  it  was  a  part  of  Him  which  died  with 
Him,  but  rose  not  with  Him  again.  Sin,  that  slayeth  all 
things,  He  slew  ;  by  dying,  He  did  destroy  him  that  hath  the 
power  of  death.  He  carried  the  disabilities  both  of  Jew  and 
Gentile  with  Him  to  the  cross,  and  by  the  cross  He  slew  the 
enmity.  There  died,  not  a  man,  but  there  died  the  Son  of 
man.  As  in  Adam  was  created,  not  a  man,  but  man ;  so  in 
Christ  died,  not  a  man,  but  human  nature  in  the  general  un- 
derwent, in  His^  death,  the  penalty  of  the  curse  ;  Adam  being 
made  the  representative  of  all  mankind  in  his  probation, 
Christ  was  made  their  representative  in  the  redemption  :  ac- 
cording as  it  is  written,  "As  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment 
came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation  ;  even  so  by  the  right- 
eousness of  one  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men  unto  justi- 
fication of  life  :"  and  again,  "  As  by  man  came  death,  so  by 
man  came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."  If  it  squareth 
with  the  goodness  and  justice  of  God,  and  the  nature  of  sin, 
that  for  the  offence  of  Adam  sin  and  misery  should  descend, 
as  at  this  day  we  behold  it ;  then,  in  like  manner,  we  should 
expect  that  righteousness  and  peace  should  likewise  be  de- 
rivable from  one  man,  to  all  who  are  united  to  Him  by  living 
faith.  And,  dear  brethren,  no  better  account  can  be  given  of 
this  matter,  than  that  God  saith  it  is  so  :  "  Christ  reconciled 
us  both  unto  God  in  one  body  by  the  cross,  having  slain  the 


340  THE  INCARNATION: 

enmity  thereby  :  and  came  and  preached  peace  to  them  which 
were  afar  off,  and  to'them  which  were  nigh :  for  through  Him  we 
both  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father,"  Whosoever 
receiveth  Christ  therefore  by  the  Spirit,  doth  enter  into  peace. 
Whosoever  believeth  to  be  justified  by  His  righteousness,  hath 
peace  with  God.  Whosoever  believeth  that  the  Son  of  God 
is  come  in  the  flesh,  and  hath  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  is 
himself  delivered  from  the  power  of  the  law  of  the  flesh,  and 
enabled  to  walk  after  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus.  And  to  all  such  there  remaineth  no  condemnation  : 
for  '*  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  us 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  :"  and  "  if  Christ  be  in  us, 
the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin,  but  the  spirit  is  life  because  of 
righteousness."  And  this  is  the  beginning  and  the  foundation 
of  all  peace,  even  reconciliation  to  God  by  the  cross  of  His 
Son.  And  it  is  the  beginning  of  all  spiritual  life,  of  all  good 
works,  and  of  all  blessedness  :  concerning  .which  I  speak  not 
at  large,  having  still  another  part  of  this  peace  to  open  to  you. 
3.  Which  is,  the  peace  that  we  have  after  we  have  been 
quickened  by  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  while  we 
are  following  out  the  life  of  faith  and  godliness.  And  here 
I  would  not  place  before  my  brethren  any  false  estimates 
or  descriptions,  as  if  the  life  of  the  saints  were  all  smooth 
and  plain,  full  of  ease  and  enjoyment.  I  believe  it  to  be  a 
warfare  unto  the  end,  with  what  intermissions  and  recessions 
the  Lord  may  grant ;  which  are  only  granted  in  order  to  refresh 
us  for  the  renewal  of  the  contest  with  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness. And  yet  I  hold,  that  in  the  contest,  in  the  heat  and 
strife  of  it,  he  that  believeth  in  Jesus,  and  is  reconciled  unto 
God  by  His  death,  hath  peace  ;  may  and  ought  always  to 
have  perfect  peace:  because  the  Son  of  man,  in  the  midst  of 
that  conflict  which  He  had  to  maintain  between  the  law  of 
the  flesh,  or  the  fallen  humanity,  wrought  upon  by  all  the  art 
and  power  of  Satan,  and  the  law  of  the  Spirit,  with  which  He 
was  anointed  without  measure,  did  always  possess  a  perfect 
peace  and  serenity  :  of  which  there  can  be  no  doubt,  from  His 
having  nothing  higher  to  bequeath  than  His  own  peace : 
"  My  peace  I  leave  with  you."  Yea,  that  He  was  in  every 
moment  of  His  life  the  very  image  of  the  Father,  and  mirror 


ITS  FRUITS.  341 

of  the  Father's  clear  and  harmonious  will,  is  never  to  be 
doubted.  He  was  for  ever  holy,  and  therefore  He  was  blessed 
for  ever.  Which  indeed  is  very  marvellous  :  that  all  the 
powers  of  disorder,  all  the  winds  of  heaven,  should  be  loosed 
against  Him,  and  invade  His  passive  flesh,  and  yet  not  dis- 
turb the  tranquillity  of  His  spirit.  For  I  reckon  that  in  that 
agony  of  the  garden,  when  His  body  was  so  violently  wrought 
on  as  never  before  was  flesh  and  blood.  His  mind  was  undis- 
turbed, unswerved  from  its  calm  and  peaceful  contentment 
with  His  Fathers  will  :  "Yet  not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  done." 
Whatever  the  desire  of  the  man  might  be,  and  no  doubt  He 
felt  the  fulness  and  sensibility  of  human  feeling,  the  will  of 
His  Father  ever  prevailed  and  governed  all :  and  being  so 
kept.  He  was  kept  in  perfect  peace.  Otherwise,  if  all  had 
not  been  at  undisturbed  rest  within  His  soul.  His  word  would 
have  had  no  power  to  lay  the  stqrmy  sea,  or  quell  the  mutin- 
ous legion  of  devils.  But  such  might  hath  the  unfallen  will 
of  man,  that  when  it  was  again  presented  to  us  in  the  Son  of 
man,  it  bare  the  sway  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  man's  habita- 
tion, yea,  and  to  the  fallen  angels,  which  had  usurped  some 
of  its  most  wretched  tenements.  Of  this  perfect  peace  of 
Christ  Jesus  the  Mediator  having  no  doubt,  notwithstanding 
the  mighty  and  furious  contest  of  which  His  humanity  was 
the  theatre,  I  have  likewise  none  with  respect  to  the  peace  in 
which  the  members  of  His  mystical  body  will  be  upholden 
by  the  operation  of  the  same  Almighty  Spirit.  For,  if  the 
Spirit  was  given  to  Him  without  measure,  then  Satan  was 
loosed  against  Him  without  measure  ;  and  if  we  have  not,  nor 
may  expect,  the  like  anointing,  then  the  Lord  will  not  permit 
against  us  the  same  fiery  onset  of  the  powers  of  hell.  How- 
ever it  may  be  apportioned  of  Him  who  "  measureth  to  every 
man  according  to  His  pleasure,"  I  doubt  no  more  that  we  are 
heirs  of  Christ's  peace  in  the  conflict  with  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness, than  that  we  are  heirs  of  the  conflict,  and  of  the  victory 
over  it.  The  peace  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus  is  a  derived 
peace,  and  yet  an  inwrought  peace :  it  is  derived  from  the 
fountain  of  Christ's  peace,  and  it  is  wrought  into  us  by  the 
same  Spirit  which  maintained  it  in  Him.  And  it  consisteth 
not    in   the  absence  of  conflict  and  controversy,  or   in    the 


342  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

cessation  of  the  militancy,  or  in  quiescence  from  suffering  ; 
but  in  the  firm  act  of  faith,  that  as  Christ  the  captain  was 
upheld  in  perfect  peace,  so  shall  we  also,  "  though  the  hills 
should  be  removed,  and  the  mountains  be  cast  into  the  depths 
of  the  sea."  I  mean  not  faith  in  Him  as  the  atonement  where- 
by our  fears  of  the  Divine  wrath  are  removed,  but  faith  in 
Him  as  the  living  Son  of  man,  after  whose  image  it  is  the 
will  of  God  that  every  saint  should  be  conformed.  Which 
will  of  God  believing,  and  believing  likewise  the  irresistible- 
ness  of  the  Almighty  Spirit,  I  go  into  the  valley  of  humility 
with  my  Lord,  and  address  myself  to  follow  His  thorny  and 
bloody  footsteps,  well  assured  that  I  shall  have  a  peace 
within  me,  which  no  thorn  or  weapon  of  blood  can  wound 
to  the  quick,  or  at  all  for  a  moment  ruffle,  I  believe  that, 
though  the  law  of  my  flesh  be  the  most  directly  and  the  most 
sternly  opposed  to  the  law  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  reconcilia- 
tion is  utterly  impracticable  and  impossible,  yet  in  the  midst 
of  the  controversy  I  shall  have  an  assurance  of  peace,  a  pre- 
sence of  peace,  which  nothing  can  remove.  I  shall  have  it, 
not  by  a  compromise  or  truce  stricken  between  the  two  ene- 
mies, nor  by  the  death  of  the  opponent,  but  by  the  presence 
of  that  Holy  Spirit,  whose  presence  is  peace  and  joy.  I  saw 
it  in  Christ :  His  was  the  extremest  case  that  ever  can  be, 
and  contained  all  within  itself:  and  I  believe  it  will  be  so 
also  in  myself,  notwithstanding  this  body  of  sin  and  death 
with  which  I  am  surrounded.  And  this  peace,  if  it  be  de- 
pendent upon  anything  but  faith,  is  dependent  upon  keeping 
up  the  fiery  contest,  in  which  if  we  relax,  then  is  it  sure  to  be 
eclipsed  in  a  measure.  This  is  all  very  wonderful,  and  must 
sound  strangely  paradoxical  to  the  natural  man  ;  but  it  is, 
and  ever  hath  been,  the  experience  of  God's  saints,  that  just 
in  proportion  to  the  spirit  and  activity  with  which  they  were 
setting  the  battle  in  array  against  spiritual  wickednesses  in 
high  places,  and  in  proportion  to  the  sufferings  and  privations 
which  they  were  thereby  enduring,  hath  been  the  sure  and 
steadfast  peace  which  they  have  felt :  strongest  on  the  rack, 
or  in  the  dungeon,  or  under  the  gallows-tree,  or  in  the  midst 
of  scoffs  and  scorns  and  derisions  of  the  multitude.     How  are 


ITS  FRUITS.  343 

they  blessed,  whose  peace  the  world,  as  it  cannot  give,  so  it 
cannot  take  away ! 

If  then,  dearly  beloved  brethren,  Christ  by  His  death  hath 
removed  the  whole  of  the  Levitical  institution,  which  God  set 
up  to  distinguish  between  the  people  that  were  in  covenant 
and  the  people  that  were  not  in  covenant  with  Him,  and 
hath  made  the  Jew  and  Gentile  one,  reconciling  them  all  to 
God  ;  how  ought  we  who  have  believed  to  find  our  natural 
peculiarities  and  distinctions  taken  out  of  the  way  of  our 
cordial  fellowship  and  love  one  with  another !  If  the  whole 
of  that  natural  obstruction  which  separateth  between  us  and 
God,  hath  been  taken  away,  and  from  the  utmost  distance  of 
our  alienation  we  have  been  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of 
Chribt ;  how  should  we  feel  at  peace  with  one  another,  and 
how  u^terly  neglectful  of  those  varieties  of  wicked  nature, 
whereoithe  very  substance  hath  been  taken  away  !  And  if  our 
natural  nan  be  crucified  with  Him,  and  we  have  a  spiritu^ 
man  bon  of  His  resurrection,  whose  origin,  whose  strength, 
and  whos'  nourishment  is  from  the  one  Holy  Spirit,  and 
whose  formand  type  is  one,  even  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  formed 
within  us  al ;  how  united  in  love  and  peace  ought  we  to  be 
one  with  amther;  how  close  and  intimate  our  communion 
and  fellowshp  ?  Truly,  brethren,  Christ  is  our  peace ;  and 
the  law  of  th«  Spirit  of  Christ  tendeth  to  love  ;  and  he  that 
dwelleth  in  G(d,  dwelleth  in  love.  This  life  of  Christ  which 
is  in  us,  is  likethe  life  which  was  in  Him, — struggling  with  a 
load  of  flesh ;  o  which  sin  hath  free  access,  and  in  which  it 
rageth  with  mi^ty  power :  but  as  the  Spirit,  which  was  in 
Him,  did  restran  the  tendency  of  the  flesh  to  malice,  and 
wrath,  and  discod,  and  all  hypocrisy,  so  that  He  persevered 
in  love  to  all,  anc  in  patience  with  the  enormous  ingratitude 
and  blind  stupidiv  of  all,  and  never  once,  no,  never  once 
yielded  unto  the  sre  and  grievous  trial ;  so,  brethren,  by  the 
mighty  working  ofthe  same  Spirit  shall  we  prevail  against 
the  law  of  the  flesh  to  maintain  love  and  peace  and  blessed 
harmony  and  comi union  with  one  another.  And  as  He 
dragged  on  the  bodjwhich  He  had  taken  to  the  cross,  where 
He  sacrificed  it  by  le  willingness  of  the  Spirit ;  so  do  we 


344  THE  INCARNATION: 

drag  on  the  body  of  our  sin  and  death,  to  lay  it  down  in  the 
grave,  a  wilHng  sacrifice  unto  God.  And  as  He  groaned  in 
spirit,  and  was  agonised  with  the  strongest  anguish,  while  He 
underwent  the  strongest  contest  and  warfare  which  any  being 
ever  endured,  yet  withal  offended  not  the  will  of  His  Fathef, 
nor  broke  the  law  of  peace  with  any  creature ;  so  ought  we, 
all-patient  of  the  contest,  and  all-conscious  of  the  rancorous, 
restless,  murderous  law  of  nature  by  which  Satan  is  goading 
us  on  to  all  uncharitableness  and  discord,  to  maintain  the 
communion  of  the  saints  in  which  we  believe,  and  to  love  one 
another  with  pure  hearts  fervently.  And  can  we  do  it  ?  Yef, 
we  can  do  it,  if  Christ,  who  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as 
we  are,  did  it.  Can  we  have  peace  and  brotherhood  amongst 
so  many  strangers  and  foreigners  as  the  Church  of  Chn'st  is 
composed  of .''  I  say  we  can,  by  Christ,  who  is  our  peace ; 
by  the  love  of  Christ  constraining  and  restraining  us  ;  by  the 
mighty  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us,  which  prevailed 
to  raise  Him  from  the  dead,  and  to  set  Him  in  thqheavenly 
places,  and  to  give  Him  all  power  for  the  sake  of  t|:e  Church, 
of  which  He  is  the  head,  and  which  is  the  fulness  of  Him 
that  filleth  all  in  all.  Dear  brethren,  these  thin/s  are  little 
borne  in  mind  in  those  infidel,  scornful,  scoffing  times  ;  but 
verily  they  are  the  old,  and  the  only  righteous  wys  in  which 
we  ought  to  walk ;  and  in  which,  as  we  mak^  progress,  we 
shall  obtain  the  blessing  of  God  upon  our  h&ds  and  upon 
the  heads  of  our  children,  and  be  a  crown  offejoicing  unto 
the  Church  of  Christ,  valuable  witnesses  in  tre  midst  of  the 
fast  consummating  apostasy,  and  patient  e^ectants  of  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  in  power  and  great  gloif,  to  be  avenged 
upon  all  those  who  know  not  God  and  obe'  not  the  gospel 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 


PART  II. 

Such,  we  conceive,  is  the  true  doctrip  of  the  holy  word 
concerning  the  grace  of  God  which  brigeth  peace ;  and  we 
come  now  to  speak  of  the  manner  of  itsaeclaration  unto  lost 
and  ruined  sinners.     Concerning  whicnl  have  this  to  say  in 


ITS  FRUITS.  345 

general,  that  I  would  take  no  lower  example  than  that  of  the 
great  High  Priest  and  Apostle  of  our  profession,  the.  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  who,  as  He  purchased  and  procured,  so  was 
He  the  first  to  minister  the  gift.  No  one,  surely,  can  refuse 
to  be  guided  by  so  good  an  example,  or  to  submit  to  such 
high  authority.  And  what  was  His  method  of  making  known 
the  grace  of  God  unto  sinful  men  ^  Of  this  we  have  the  ex- 
ample in  His  discourse  with  Nicodemus,  to  whom  His  first 
lesson  is,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God."  And  how  this  new  birth  is  accomplished 
He  declareth,  in  the  same  place,  to  be  by  no  outward  ordi- 
nances or  means.  .Albeit  He  gives  to  baptism  its  due  place, 
yet,  saith  He,  that  every  one  who  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  so 
born,  not  by  calculation  of  means,  or  mere  arrangement  of 
plans,  but  by  an  invisible  power  from  on  high,  as  much,  and 
far  more,  above  the  calculations  and  arrangements  and  powers 
of  men,  as  is  the  motion  of  the  viewless  winds  ;  whose  rush- 
ing sound  you  hear,  but  whose  substance  you  see  not,  and 
whose  motions,  hither  and  thither,  are  under  the  control  and 
with  the  knowledge  of  no  earthly  power.  By  which  word  the 
Lord  doth  signify  no  uncertainty  nor  lawlessness,  no  hap- 
hazard nor  instability  of  purpose,  nor  undefinedness  of  end  in 
the  Holy  Spirit's  work  ;  but,  simply,  that  it  is  not  reducible 
to  any  rule  of  man's  foresight,  nor  attainable  by  any  means 
of  man's  invention,  nor  resident  in  any  ordinance  so  as  to  be 
necessarily  connected  therewith  or  unerringly  wrought  there- 
by ; — that  the  children  which  He  begetteth  are  not  born  "  of 
blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but 
of  God."  HoAvever,  with  respect  to  the  procession  of  the 
Spirit  the  Lord  speaketh  not  in  this  discourse  with  Nicode- 
mus ;  reserving  that  point  to  be  opened  at  large  to  His  dis- 
ciples in  His  last  discourse.  But  thus  far  this  passage  serveth 
us,  to  shew  that  the  beginning  of  sanctification — and  if  the 
beginning,  then  also  the  continuation  and  perfecting  of  it — is 
separated  from  all  human  help  and  all  visible  means,  into  the 
immediate  power  of  God.  Not  that  human  help  is  not  blessed ; 
for  God  hath  appointed  helps  in  His  Church,  of  which  the 
principal  is  the  ministry  of  the  word  :  not  that  visible  ordi- 
nances are  not  mightily  blessed  ;  for  they  are  of  Christ's  ap- 


346  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

pointment,  and  therefore  He  will  take  care  to  honour  them  : 
but  that  the  help  of  the  ministry  and  the  ordinances  are  no- 
thing in  themselves,  yea,  worse  than  nothing — a  stumbling- 
block,  a  refuge  of  lies — unless  they  be  looked  to  simply  as 
ordinances  of  the  will  of  God,  and  vehicles  of  the  Spirit ;  ves- 
sels indeed  to  hold  the  water,  but  stony  vessels,  leaden  cis- 
terns ;  which,  if  you  would  bruise  them,  would  only  bruise 
into  dry  dust ;  if  you  would  melt  them,  would  only  melt  into 
deadly  scorching  liquid  ;  but  would  not  yield  you  one  drop, 
no,  not  a  drop,  of  the  living  water,  with  which,  to  the  lip  of 
faith,  they  are  filled  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Nevertheless,  in  this  very  discourse  with  Nicodemus  the 
Lord  doth  not  fail  to  exhibit  Himself  to  the  whole  world, 
with  what  conspicuousness  the  brazen  serpent  was  exhibited 
to  the  whole  camp  upon  the  top  of  the  pole ;  to  present 
His  wounded,  bleeding  body  upon  the  cross  to  all  the  world, 
with  the  same  assurance  of  health  with  which  the  serpent- 
bitten  people  were  surely  healed.  And  as  the  language  used 
is  of  the  very  largest  character, — "whosoever  believeth  in 
Him" — "  He  cometh  not  to  judge,  but  to  save  the  world;" 
and  as  the  condemnation  is  rested  upon  the  rejection  of 
the  light, — "  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into 
the  world,  but  that  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light ; " 
and,  above  all,  because  the  emblem  chosen  is  of  so  remarkable 
a  kind  for  its  conspicuousness ;  and  the  cure  dependent  upon 
nothing  but  a  look,  and  that  look  free  to  all ;  and  all  so 
prompted  by  stinging  pains  to  give  it  at  every  stage  of  the 
disease,  from  the  first  moment  of  the  serpent-bite  to  the  last 
moment  of  departing  life : — for  all  these  reasons  I  have  no 
more  doubt  that  it  is  as  essential  to  make  a  free,  full,  and 
universal  offer  of  Christ's  salvation,  as  it  is  essential  to  declare 
that  never  was  a  man  the  better  for  it  unless  the  Holy  Spirit 
applied  it  unto  his  soul ;  yea,  that  it  will  prove,  to  all  who 
wait  not  for  and  obtain  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  nothing  but  judg- 
ment and  reprobation  and  the  unpardonable  sin.  These  two 
things,  then,  I  find  united  in  this  discourse  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
— His  own  lifting  up  for  the  salvation  of  the  world ;  and  the 
impossibility  of  our  ever  inheriting,  or  even  seeing,  His  king- 
dom, but  by  the  new  birth  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  I  con- 


ITS  FRUITS.  347 

elude  assuredly,  that  they  are  equally  essential  parts  of  every 
declaration  and  every  publication  of  the  gospel. 

But  there  is  one  element  more,  to  make  up  the  fulness  of 
the  gospel  message  of  salvation,  which  is  likewise  contained, 
though  not  explicitly  propounded,  in  this  discourse  of  the 
Lord :  I  mean,  the  will  of  the  Father,  as  preceding,  both  in 
the  purpose  and  in  the  operation,  the  manifestation  of  the 
Son  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  grand  funda- 
mental principle,  this  first  and  parent  element  of  all  word  and 
of  all  operation,  is  implicitly  contained  in  these  words,  "  God 
so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son."  For 
if  the  gift  be  His,  then  all  the  value  of  the  gift  must  be 
acknowledged  to  come  from  Him,  and  all  the  efficacy  of  the 
gift  likewise :  and  if  the  gift  proceeded  from  His  love,  then 
His  love  is  to  be  preferred  before  the  gift,  because  it  was  be- 
fore it :  and  we  are  not  greedily  to  devour  the  gift,  and  say, 
,"  Ah !  I  have  gotten  it,"  as  do  a  scrambling,  avaricious  mob  ; 
but  we  are  earnestly  to  contemplate  the  mystery  of  love  out 
of  which  it  proceedeth,  and  to  behold  the  magnitude  of  the 
love  which  it  contains.  We  should  do  this  first,  acknowledge 
the  Father's  awful,  self-originated  act  of  love  :  then  peruse 
with  faith  and  desire  the  gift  of  His  Son,  which  He  hath 
given  us :  and,  finding  that  the  coming  of  the  Comforter  is 
necessary  to  our  being  made  partakers  thereof;  and  that  of 
ourselves  we  cannot  take  hold  of  it,  but  that  this  Comforter  is 
freely  given  in  the  gift,  and  honoureth  us  by  fetching  it  into 
our  souls,  and  possessing  us  with  its  rich  fountain  ;  we  should 
wait  for,  desire,  and  stretch  out  our  arms  to  receive,  reverently 
entreat,  and  delight  to  entertain,  and  willingly  submit  our- 
selves to,  that  last  Divine  visitor — last  in  order  of  procession, 
but  first  in  operation — who  worketh  in  us  faith  upon  the  Son 
of  God  ;  who  leadeth  us  unto  the  Father,  and  enableth  us  to 
do  all  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will.  But  that  so  important, 
the  most  important,  the  first  principle  of  the  gospel  message, 
may  come  before  you  in  its  true  light,  I  turn  to  another  dis- 
course of  the  Lord  ;  and  it  mattereth  not,  dear  brethren,  to 
which,  they  are  all  so  constant  to  the  declaration  and  so  full 
of  the  spirit  of  it :  for  well  might  Christ  say.  He  spoke  no- 
thing of  Himself,  that  He  did  nothing  of  Himself,  that  He 


348  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

bare  not  witness  of  Himself,  but  of  the  Father  which  sent 
Him. 

As  it  were  at  random,  therefore,  I  open  the  Gospel  of  St 
John — that  record  of  the  truth — and  I  find  it  thus  written,  in 
the  discourse  which  He  made  concerning  the  communion  of 
His  body  and  His  blood  (chap.  vi.  37  :)  "All  that  the  Father 
giveth  me  shall  come  unto  me ;  and  him  that  cometh  unto 
me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Not  only,  then,  is  He  the  gift 
of  the  Father  to  the  world,  but  every  believer  is  the  gift  of 
the  Father  unto  Him  :  these  come  to  Him  :  these  He  keep- 
eth,  losing  not  one  :  these  He  bringeth  unto  the  Father,  for 
He  is  the  way  unto  the  Father,  and  no  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father  but  by  Him.  But  first  the  Father  must  give  them 
unto  Him  :  "  Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  unto 
me."  All  included  in  this  gift  come  to  Jesus ;  who  doth  in 
no  wise  cast  them  out,  but  keepeth  them,  by  the  power  of 
His  Spirit,  unto  salvation ;  redeemeth  them  from  the  power 
of  the  flesh,  and  of  the  world,  of  death  and  of  the  grave ;  in- 
vesteth  them  with  royal  vicegerency  in  His  millennial  king- 
dom ;  and  afterwards  presenteth  them  unto  the  Father,  along 
with  that  kingdom  which  they  have  been  joined  with  Him  in 
subduing  and  purifying,  and  which  is  to  be  presented  unto 
Him  without  spot  or  blemish  or  any  such  thing  ;  and,  when 
purified,  to  stand  the  monument  and  trophy  of  redeeming 
grace ;  the  peculiar  seat  and  chosen  abode  of  the  God-man, 
and  of  His  court  of  redeemed  ones ;  from  whence,  and  by 
whom,  with  swift  ministry.  He  shall  rule  and  reign  over  the 
universe  of  God.  For  observe  what  follows  this  precious 
declaration  :  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come  unto 
me,  and  him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out : 
For  I  came  down  from  heaven  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but  the 
will  of  him  that  sent  me  :  and  this  is  the  Father's  will  which 
hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he  hath  given  me  I  should 
lose  nothing,  but  should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day." 
Whereby  we  perceive  that  the  work  of  redemption  is  not  yet 
completed,  though  the  price  of  it  be  fully  paid  ;  that  the  elec- 
tion have  to  be  drawn  out,  the  kingdom  established,  and  the 
day  of  the  resurrection  and  judgment  accomplished,  before 
the  will  of  God  be  done,  and  the  work  of  the  Son  of  God  be 


ITS  FRUITS.  349 

finished.  But  in  all  the  progression,  as  in  the  first  beginning 
and  origination  of  it,  He  acknowledgeth  the  will  of  the  Father 
to  have  the  priority  in  relation  to  His  own  work  :  and  I  con- 
clude that  every  minister  of  Christ  should  do  the  same: 
should  shew  forth  the  will  and  purpose  of  the  Father  ;  should 
postpone  everything  to  it :  should  shew  everything  as  pro- 
ceeding from  it :  should  trace  up  everything  unto  it, — all  that 
the  Son  hath  revealed  in  the  written  Word,  all  that  the  Spirit 
hath  wrought  in  the  Church :  and  he  who  shunneth  to  do  so, 
shunneth  to  declare  the  counsel  of  God,  dishonoureth  Christ's 
prophetic  office,  setteth  up  himself  as  some  great  one ;  and  if 
he  flincheth  from  doing  so,  he  feareth  man  rather  than  God, 
he  hateth  the  true  Church  of  Christ,  and  is  fast  apostatising 
to  some  fatal  heresy. 

Some  of  you  may  haply  murmur  at  this.  So  did  those 
Jews  of  Capernaum :  and  what  Christ  said  to  them  I  say 
unto  you  who  murmur,  "  Murmur  not  among  yourselves:  no 
man  can  come  unto  me,  except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent 
me,  draw  him ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day.  It 
is  written  in  the  prophets,  And  they  shall  be  all  taught  of 
God.  Every  man  that  hath  heard,  and  hath  learned  of  the 
Father,  cometh  unto  me."  That  is  to  say, — '  You  who  mur- 
mur, do  only  growl  aloud  your  own  rejection  and  reprobation 
of  my  Father,  and  attest  the  truth  of  what  I  said,  "  that  no 
man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me 
draw  him."  Murmur  you  will,  and  murmur  will  every  man 
who  heareth  of  Me,  till  the  end  of  time.  The  reluctant,  the 
enslaved  will  of  man,  and  Satan  its  oppressor  and  master, 
will  ever  hate  the  will  of  the  Father  revealed  in  Me.  There 
is  in  Me  no  form,  nor  comeliness,  nor  beauty,  that  I  should 
be  desired.  I  am  the  embodied  Will  of  God,  in  whose  image 
ye  were  created  ;  but  now  ye  are  under  the  will  of  the  flesh, 
which  is  so  contrary  to  God  as  to  be  cursed  of  Him  to  death. 
That  resistance,  that  repulsion,  that  most  violent  contradic- 
tion in  the  universe  of  God,  must  be  overcome  by  My  Father, 
whose  almightiness  alone  is  able  to  draw  against  the  power 
that  draweth  you  away  from  Him.  Doth  not  the  Scripture 
suppose  this  state  of  things  under  the  new  covenant,  when  it 
saith,  "And  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God  .''"     Now  every 


350  THE  INCARNATION: 

man  that  hath  received  this  teaching  ;  every  man  that  hath 
heard  the  testimony  of  Me,  which  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy ; 
every  one  that  hath  heard  what  God  spake  at  sundry  times 
and  in  divers  manners,  by  His  servants  the  prophets,  unto 
the  fathers,  will  come  now  unto  Me,  and  hear  what  the 
Father  speaketh  by  His  own  Son,  whom  He  hath  appointed 
heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  He  made  the  worlds.' 

I  have  nothing  more  to  say  concerning  the  example  of 
Christ  as  a  preacher  of  His  own  gospel,  than  solemnly  to  de- 
clare, in  the  hearing  of  His  Church,  that  in  all  His  discourses, 
and  in  all  the  discourses  and  letters  of  His  apostles,  I  do  find 
these  three  elements  concurring, — the  powerful  will  of  the 
Father,  the  free  presentation  of  the  Son  unto  the  world,  with 
the  gift  of  the  election  in  Him,  and  the  working  of  the  Spirit 
upon  the  heart  of  every  believer.  And  it  must  be  so,  or  else 
there  is  no  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  If  these  parts  are  not  to 
enter  into  every  discourse  of  the  work  of  salvation,  then  the 
Trinity  is  a  mere  chimera,  is  an  invention  of  the  subtle  brain, 
is  a  falsehood.  But  if  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  be  the 
foundation  of  all  orthodox  doctrine,  as  I  believe  it  to  be ;  if 
the  Trinity  be  the  only  eternally  existing  substance,  from  the 
operation  of  whom  all  things  that  are  have  been  created  out 
of  nothing  that  is  seen,  but  out  of  the  invisible  will,  word, 
and  Spirit  of  the  Godhead  ;  if  all  things  that  are,  and  every- 
thing that  is,  be  but  the  shewing  forth  of  the  Divine  Essence 
of  the  Triune  God,  in  the  bringing  of  which  into  existence 
each  Person  hath  had  His  proper  office  and  activity ;  but, 
above  all,  if  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  be  the  manifestation 
of  the  Trinity,  that  great  work  of  God  by  which  the  Divine 
being  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  became 
known,  and  the  work  from  which  the  Godhead  began  to  be 
named  by  that  name  :  if  these  things  be  sq — which  every  one 
not  a  Socinian  believeth — then  I  do  say,  that  every  act  of 
the  preacher  of  the  gospel  is  incomplete,  yea,  is  not  an  act  of 
preaching  Christ,  which  doth  not  contain  the  three  offices  of 
the  Divine  Persons,  and  display  them.  For  the  Son  of  man, 
the  Christ,  was  not  the  manifestation  of  the  Son  only,  but  He 
was  the  manifestation  of  the  Father  also  :  "  For  whoso  hath 
seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."     And  He  was  the  manifesta- 


ITS  FRUITS.  351 

tion  of  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  also,  who  dwelt  in  Him  in  His 
immeasurable  and  infinite  abundance  of  power  and  wisdom. 
Yea,  Jesus  Christ  was  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily ; 
and  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  was  the  declaration,  the  reve- 
lation, of  the  work  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy- 
Ghost  in  the  redemption  of  the  Avorld :  and  he  is  no  minister 
of  it  who  cannot  draw  it  from  this  fountain  ;  he  is  no  minister 
of  it  who  cannot  trace  all  the  stores  of  doctrine,  of  principle, 
and  of  act,  to  this  fountain.  I  say  it  the  third  time,  and  will 
stand  to  it  while  I  have  a  being,  that  he  is  no  minister  of  the 
gospel  who  doth  not  shew  forth  the  co-operation  of  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  in  the  salvation 
of  every  soul,  in  the  production  of  the  Church,  in  the  mani- 
festation of  the  kingdom,  in  the  eternal  glory  of  the  finished 
and  completed  work. 

To  make  this  point  still  more  clear,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  exhibit  the  danger  of  overlooking  it,  let  me  now  shortly 
point  out  the  consequences  which  flow  from  neglecting  any 
of  these  essential  parts  of  every  declaration  and  of  every  work 
of  Divine  grace. 

Among  those  who  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity — for  in 
respect  to  those  who  deny  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  I  can  no  more  regard  them  as  Christians,  than 
the  Jews  would  have  regarded  as  Jews  those  who  denied  and 
abjured  the  sacred  name  of  Jehovah — among  those,  I  say, 
who  hold  the  Trinity  of  Persons  in  the  Divine  substance,  the 
great  majority  of  errors,  I  had  almost  said  all  errors,  are  to 
be  attributed  to  the  undue  neglect  or  the  undue  preference  of 
some  one  or  other  of  these  three  great  heads  of  doctrine ;  or, 
to  speak  theologically,  these  sects  arise  from  dividing  the 
substance  or  dissolving  the  unity  of  the  substance  of  the 
Godhead,  through  the  vulgar  understanding  and  deceitfulness 
of  the  word  "  three,"  and  of  the  word  "  persons."  I  shall 
enumerate  and  shew  you  the  derivation  of  certain  of  the  most 
conspicuous  and  notable  divisions  into  which  the  Church 
falleth  through  this  cause. 

Of  those  who  err  in  respect  to  the  office  of  the  Father, 
there  are  chiefly  two  parties  :  first,  the  Antinomians,  who 
make  His  office  the  whole,  instead  of  the  first  and  chief  one 


352  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

in  our  redemption  ;  and  the  Arminians,  who  make  nothing  of 
it  at  all.  These  two  are  opposites  to  one  another,  and  bear 
each  other  up,  from  standing  at  the  opposite  points  of  the 
circle  of  truth.  The  Antinomians  are  ever  insisting  upon 
the  decree  of  election,  and  will  not  dwell  upon  the  Son,  by 
whom  that  decree  was  opened,  and  by  whom  the  power  and 
the  form  of  the  regenerate  man  was  brought  unto  us.  They 
talk  of  His  seed  being  in  Him  from  all  eternity  :  of  their 
being  elected,  and  justified,  and  sanctified  in  Him  from  all 
eternity  :  and  they  might  add,  risen,  and  blessed,  and  glorified 
also  ;  for  so  far  doth  Paul  go  in  the  Ephesians,  and  so  far  will 
I  go  along  with  them,  and  so  far  must  every  one  go  who  under- 
standeth  anything  concerning  the  relation  of  the  Father  to 
the  Son,  in  whom  He  beholdeth  all  things  from  all  eternity 
that  have  been  or  are  to  be  in  time.  But  when  they  stand  still 
at  this  point,  and  will  proceed  no  further,  then  are  they  wilful 
and  foolish  :  for,  if  Christ  the  Head  had  to  become  manifest 
by  the  Spirit,  and  to  keep  the  law,  and  be  obedient  unto  the 
death,  then  have  all  the  members  of  Christ  by  the  same 
Spirit  to  become  manifest,  and  to  be  brought  through  the 
same  probation,  and  to  achieve  the  same  victory  over  the 
devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  over  sin,  and  death,  and  hell. 
And  it  is  as  necessary  to  the  work  of  salvation  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  should  make  us  manifest  as  the  sons  of  God,  formed  in 
the  image  of  Christ,  as  it  is  that  we  should  have  been  included 
in  the  purpose  of  the  Father.  Wherefore  I  will  ever  take  my 
liberty  in  presenting  the  person  of  Christ  as  the  type  of  His 
people,  into  which  they  are  to  grow  up  from  the  new  birth,  by 
the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  so  ought  every  Chris- 
tian minister.  But  as  to  the  law  of  Moses,  they  may  go  and 
yoke  themselves  into  its  harness  who  please  :  for  my  part,  I 
prefer  Jesus  Christ  as  my  law  and  my  lawgiver,  and  I  expect, 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  within  me,  to  be  conformed  thereto.  I  am 
not  of  Moses,  but  of  Christ ;  and  sure  1  am,  Moses  and  his 
economy,  law  moral,  ceremonial,  and  political,  had  no  end  or 
object  at  all  but  Christ ;  who,  being  come,  I  will  peruse  and 
delight  in,  because  I  love  the  daylight  better  than  I  do  the 
signal-lamp  of  the  night,  or  the  twilight  of  the  morning. 
The  second  class  are  the  Arminians,  who  reject  the  will  of 


ITS  FRUITS.  353 

the  Father  altogether  ;  or,  if  not  altogether,  subject  it  to  con- 
ditions which  make  it  dependent  upon  the  will  of  the  crea- 
ture, and  that,  too,  a  depraved  fallen  creature  :  than  which 
nothing  can  be  more  dishonourable  to  God,  or  more  decep- 
tions unto  ourselves.  In  consequence  of  which  disorder  in 
the  main  spring  and  moving  power,  their  whole  system  is  out 
of  joint.  They  offer  the  gospel  unto  all,  but  keep  back  the 
truth  that  no  one  can  lay  hold  of  it  except  his  will  be  renewed 
after  the  will  of  God  :  and  so,  in  the  very  offer  of  the  gospel, 
they  inculcate  a  fatal  error,  that  the  will  of  man  hath  a  liberty 
in  itself  towards  good  as  towards  evil ;  whereas,  everybody 
knows,  and  they  themselves  will  confess  when  hard  pressed, 
that  it  is  underlying  a  grievous  yoke  of  bondage.  Now,  this 
mistake  in  the  beginning  is  fatal  in  the  issues ;  for  a  religion 
of  will-worship  is  engendered — that  is,  a  religion  of  outward 
forms  and  inward  reforms,  of  frames  and  of  feelings,  of  sensa- 
tions and  emotions,  of  abstinences  and  severities,  of  such  a 
kind,  in  short,  as  we  see  among  the  Papists,  and  are  beginning 
to  see  amongst  ourselves.  For  if  the  will  confess  not  its 
bondage,  nor  seek  redemption  at  the  will  of  God,  nor  acknow- 
ledge the  Father's  as  the  only  absolute  will,  what  is  there  left, 
but  that  the  will  of  the  creature  should  do  its  best  to  set  up 
the  framework  of  a  system  according  to  the  strength  which 
resideth  in  it .-'  And  forasmuch  as  a  fallen  will  must  seek  for 
some  guide  to  itself  which  it  deferreth  to  ;  when  it  doth  not 
acknowledge  this  in  the  will  of  God,  the  supreme  and  absolute, 
believing  that  it  hath  in  itself  a  certain  power  and  faculty  of 
well-doing  ;  by  what  shall  it  be  guided,  but  by  expediency,  or 
the  greatest  quantity  of  visible  good  and  attainable  usefulness.^ 
And,  accordingly,  you  shall  ever  find  Arminianism  a  religion 
of  accommodations,  and  amalgamation  of  contraries ;  trying 
to  wash  the  Ethiopian  white,  and  to  say  barefacedly  that 
he  is  white :  striking  a  truce  between  the  world  and  the 
Church ;  and  foregoing  God's  presence,  in  order  to  do  the 
world  good.  And  as  to  believing  an  apostasy  and  reproba- 
tion in  the  Church,  they  would  not  speak  of  such  a  thing,  it 
is  to  pious  ears  so  shocking;  but  they  call  the  abominable 
mother  of  harlots,  "  our  erring  sister  : "  and  that  is  well  said  ; 
twin-sisters  they  are  ;  and  twin-sisters  in  error  they  are  :  for 
VOL.  V.  Z 


354  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

from  no  worse  a  stock  did  the  Papacy  spring,  than  this  same 
loving  intermarriage  of  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  man, 
who  till  death  are  the  most  violent  enemies  ;  this  same  tender- 
hearted mediation  between  the  Church  and  the  world  ;  this 
benevolent  disposition  of  doing  all  the  good  in  our  power  by 
any  means,  and  in  the  very  shortest  way. 

Between  these  two  extremes  of  Antinomianism  and  Armi- 
nianism,  the  Calvinists  take  the  middle  and  the  true  ground 
— I  use  that  name  for  want  of  another,  which  might  stand  in 
proper  contrast  with  the  two  former ;  but  I  would  rather  say, 
the  doctrine  of  the  Churches  established  in  these  lands,  as 
they  are  set  forth  in  our  Reformation-standards,  and  were 
expounded  in  preaching  till  after  the  Synod  of  Dort ;  when, 
in  England,  Arminianism  got  the  upper  hand,  which  it  hath 
kept  till  this  day ;  and  was  only  driven  out  of  Scotland  by 
the  sword  and  by  the  bow  of  our  forefathers.  For,  setting 
out  with  the  purpose  of  God  to  bring  out  of  the  fall  a  great 
manifestation  of  grace,  we  say  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
thereto  that  He  should  suspend,  by  His  own  electing  love, 
His  sovereign  electing  love,  of  which  no  man  nor  angel  can 
give  any  explanation,  nor  will  He  Himself,  except  it  be  in 
that  name,  "Jehovah,  I  am  that  I  am  :"  by  this  it  pleased 
Him,  in  foresight  of  nothing,  but  on  purpose  to  make  His 
Son  manifest  by  incarnation,  to  suspend  the  ruin  of  certain, 
whom,  by  the  ministry  of  the  word  and  Spirit,  He  would  in 
His  own  time  draw  out  and  manifest,  to  the  glory  of  His 
sovereign  grace,  by  which  He  maketh  them  acceptable  in  the 
Beloved.  And  thus  believing  we  proceed  to  minister  the 
gospel  in  the  open  face  of  the  world — that  is,  to  hold  up 
Christ  in  the  sight  of  the  camp,  calling  all  to  look  upon  Him : 
and,  withal,  we  tell  them,  that  no  man  can  come  unto  Him 
except  the  Father  draw  him ;  and  that  no  man  can  enter  into 
His  kingdom  unless  the  Holy  Spirit  renew  him  from  the  very 
birth.  And  having  held  up  Christ,  the  fulness  of  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  we  leave  the  matter  then  in  the  hands 
of  the  blessed  Spirit,  to  bring  out  the  election  of  the  Father, 
and  join  them  in  eternal  union  to  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ. 
And  who  will  tell  me  that  this  is  not  preaching  the  gospel 
freely }     It  is  that  which  reformed  these  nations,  which  this 


ITS  FRUITS.  355 

Arminian  style  of  it  is  threatening  to  methodise,  or,  as  they 
phrase  it,  to  evangelise  :  but  I  refuse  the  term,  it  ought  to 
stand  "  methodise ; "  for  as  the  doctrine  is  a  low,  and  in  a 
good  measure  a  false,  mctliod  of  doctrine ;  so  is  the  religion  it 
produceth  a  low,  and  in  a  good  measure  a  false,  vietJiod  of 
religion. 

Now,  the  second  set  of  errors  in  the  Trinitarian  Church 
ariseth  from  isolating  the  substance  of  the  Son,  or  overrating 
His  office,  as  if  it  were  all  in  all.  This  is  particularly  the 
shortcoming  of  those  who  call  themselves  evangelical,  and  of 
all  who  arc  wont  to  pride  themselves  in  being  Biblc-CJiristians: 
and  I  am  sorry  it  hath  seized  too  many  of  the  intellectual  men 
of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  who  should  know  better;  and  given 
orisfin  to  a  notion  of  faith  which  could  not  have  lived  in  the 
region  of  the  north  fifty  years  ago,  but  would  have  been 
preached  out  of  the  king's  dominions  from  the  one  corner  of 
the  kirk  unto  the  other.  And  it  is  doing  the  work  of  Ar- 
minianism,  where  the  name  of  Arminianism  dare  not  be  ut- 
tered. But  of  this  in  its  place. — In  Christ's  incarnate  Divinit}^ 
as  hath  been  said,  not  only  the  eternal  Word,  but  the  will  of 
the  Father,  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  were  all  embodied  in 
their  fulness  ;  that  we  might  know  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  well  as  the  Son  ;  but  when  the  incarnate  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  was  exalted  into  glory,  that  object  of  His  mis- 
sion was  served,  and  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  their  separate  personalities  and  offices,  stood  re- 
vealed. Wherefore  His  apostles  were  commanded  to  baptize 
in  the  name  of  Jesus  no  longer,  but  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not,  therefore,  right  for 
any  disciple  of  Christ  to  rest  in  the  perusal  of  His  person 
only ;  but  through  that  most  blessed  way  to  ascend  unto  the 
Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  to  know  them,  and 
to  honour  them,  in  their  several  personalities,  and  so  to  preach 
them  unto  the  Church — for  into  that  name  the  Church  is  bap- 
tized, and  for  the  testimony  of  that  name  the  Church  is  main- 
tained, until  the  Lord  shall  come  again,  and  reveal  in  the 
glorified  condition  that  same  fulness  of  the  Godhead  which 
he  formerly  revealed  in  the  condition  of  humility.  Therefore 
they  do  not  well,  but  do  exceedingly  straiten  themselves,  and 


356  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

depress  the  standing  of  their  people,  who  will  only  dwell 
upon  Christ  and  Him  crucified,  and  will  not  go  on  to  divide 
the  personalities  of  the  Divinity,  while  they  divide  not  the 
substance  ;  for  they  keep  them  under  the  shadow  of  the 
fleshly,  which,  even  to  those  who  saw  and  felt  it,  was  inferior 
to  the  spiritual  dispensation  that  came  at  Pentecost,  so  that 
it  was  expedient  for  Him  to  go  away ; — how  much  more  in- 
ferior is  the  mere  report  and  description  of  that  veiled  glory 
and  flesh-encumbered  activity  of  the  God-man !  If  they  will 
recompose  the  personalities,  and  see  them  manifest  together 
once  more,  let  them  carry  the  expectations  of  the  Church  for- 
ward to  His  coming,  "whom,  having  not  seen,  we  love;" 
whom  we  would  not  see  in  the  flesh,  because  we  have  a  more 
excellent  sight  of  Him  in  the  Spirit,  and  wait  for  a  more  ex- 
cellent still  in  the  manifestation  of  His  glory.  At  the  best,  I 
say,  it  is  but  a  shadow  or  description  of  the  fleshly  body  of 
Jesus  which  is  at  this  day  presented  to  the  people  called 
evangelical ;  and  they  do  consequently  dwell  in  a  darkness 
that  may  be  felt,  groping  their  way,  like  men  in  a  mist,  whose 
imaginations  are  full  of  precipices  and  pitfalls ;  and  whose 
ears  are  terrified  with  every  voice,  lest  it  should  be  a  lion 
roaring  on  their  path,  or  a  hungry  wolf  tracking  their  foot- 
steps. And,  from  this  looking  upon  Christ  manifested  in  the 
flesh,  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  veiled,  they  are  continually 
poring  upon  the  book  which  reporteth  it,  instead  of  waiting 
for  the  Spirit,  which  worketh  in  us  the  same  mind  that  was  in 
Jesus ;  the  Spirit,  that  overflowing  fountain  of  living  waters 
which  springs  out  of  the  belly  of  the  truly  spiritual  believer. 
But  so  it  is,  that,  forgetting,  or  almost  forgetting,  the  Spirit ; 
using  Him  merely  as  an  oculist,  once  and  away,  to  couch  their 
eye ;  they  go  on  reading  and  reading,  like  schoolboys :  and 
they  will  have  their  little  text  in  the  morning,  to  be  their 
talisman  through  the  day ;  and  their  little  morning  comment 
on  it  ;  and  they  are  full  of  expositions. — Oh,  this  is  a  drudg- 
ery, a  weary  drudgery,  to  one  who  knoweth  the  power  and 
presence  of  the  Spirit  to  originate  truth  in  the  fountain,  and 
give  answers  from  the  oracle.  And  as  to  any  idea  of  Christ 
dwelling  in  us,  they  have  lost  not  only  the  substance,  but  the 
reverence  of  it,  and  explain  it  away  into  a  figure  and  a  meta- 


ITS  FRUITS.  357 

phor :  and  what  have  they  left  but  the  paper  and  print  of  the 
book  ?  which,  with  shame  I  declare  it,  they  talk  about  more 
after  the  style  of  a  Mohammedan  talking  about  the  Koran, 
or  a  Jew  about  the  Talmud,  than  of  a  spiritual  Christian 
united  to  Christ  speaking  of  the  word  of  Christ.  For  if  I 
have  Christ,  I  have  more  than  His  word,  I  have  Himself; 
He  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  Him. 

Hence  cometh  that  bastard  notion  of  faith,  which  I  cannot 
away  with, — that  it  is  merely  the  link  which  joineth  the  mind 
of  man  with  the  record  of  the  book.     And  they  are  grown  so 
conceited  of  their  discovery,  that  these  barren  children  Avill  go 
about  the  country,  and  laugh  to  scorn  their  fruitful  fathers,  as 
having  been  fruitful  only  in  mysticism  and  absurdity.     I  do 
devoutly  abhor  this  nostrum   (for  I   can  give  it  no  better 
name)  for  making  all  mysteries  plain ;  and  if  God  spare  me, 
I  shall  yet  live  to  expose  it.     They  go  about — and  men  they 
are,  many  of  them,  most  dear  unto  my  soul — to  speculate 
concerning  Christianity,  as  they  call  it  ;  how  intellectual,  how 
moral,  how  political  it  is,  be3^ond  all  systems  ;  how  it  is  ac- 
commodated to  the  faculties  of  the  understanding,  to  the 
feelings  of  the  heart,  to  the  well-being  of  the  community ; 
how  it  will  purify  the  brackish  fountains  of  knowledge ;  how 
it  will  heal  the  distemperature  of  the  moral  atmosphere  of 
.society,  and  do  a  thousand  fine  things  ;  for  the  sake  of  which 
they  would  pray  men  to  be  so  gracious  as  to  give  ear  unto 
their  God.     And  thus  they  seek  by  smooth  and  flattering 
words,  and  well-turned  sentences,  and  well-built  arguments, 
to  produce  that  natural  faith  ;  which  is  no  faith,  but  sight, 
intellectual  or  moral  or  prudential  discernment.     But  I  say 
unto  you,  ye  cozeners  of  human    nature,   that  faith    is   by 
pre-eminence  the  gift  of  God  ;  and,  wherever  given,  will  fight 
against  nature  in  all  its  courses  ;  it  will  beat  down  the  works 
of  the  natural  man,  and  your  beautiful  nature  it  will  confla- 
grate ;  your  knowledge  it  will  blow  away  into  thin  air,  and 
sublime  towards  the  limbo  of  vanity  beyond  the  moon  ;  your 
sentimentalists,  your  men  of  feeling,  your  songsters  sweet, 
your  novelists,  your  moral  scaflblders,  (for  build  a  wall  or  lay 
a  stone  in  its  true  place  they  never  did,  nor  will  do,)  the 
whole  tribe  of  your  naturalists,  rationalists,  and  neologians, 


358  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

with  which  the  sunbeam  swarms,  and  the  very  ghttering  ele- 
ment itself  in  which  they  flutter,  this  gospel,  whose  suitable- 
ness to  improve  them  all  you  fondly  prate  and  preach  about, 
will  first  utterly  destroy,  as  so  many  gewgaws,  which  Lucifer, 
the  son  of  the  morning,  hath  made  to  mislead  and  destroy 
benighted  men,  groping  their  way  darkly  on  to  death  and  de- 
struction. O  Scotland  !  O  my  country  !  that  thou  shouldest 
have  nursed,  and  that  thy  best  and  dearest  children  do  pa- 
tronise, these  low  thoughts  concerning  faith  and  the  work  of 
religion  !  May  the  Lord  God,  whom  my  fathers  have  served 
in  faithfulness  for  many  generations,  enable  me,  or  some  more 
worthy  servant  of  His,  to  expose  the  utter  futility  of  all  such 
idle  conceits,  which  have  come  of  forgetting  that  it  is  an  in- 
visible God  we  worship  by  the  Spirit,  and  not  an  incarnate 
God  whom  we  worship  in  the  flesh,  or  by  the  report  written 
of  Him  in  the  book. 

There  is  a  second  error, — to  make  nothing  of  the  word  at 
all,  but  to  consider  it  as  utterly  superseded  by  the  indwelling 
Spirit :  which  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  former,  and  so  sup- 
porteth  it,  and  is  by  it  supported  :  like  Antinomianism  and 
Arminianism,  helps-meet  for  each  other's  weakness,  and  un- 
able to  stand  alone.  I  wonder  there  should  have  been  any 
need  of  an  incarnation  at  all,  or  of  any  prophet,  or  of  any 
apostle,  if,  as  these  fondly  conceit,  the  Spirit  could  do  this 
work  alone.  Or  do  they  mean  that  the  Spirit  cometh  of  Him- 
self, and  proceedeth  not  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  .?  and 
if  He  proceed  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  will  He  not  con- 
firm the  testimony  which  they  have  given  of  themselves } 
But,  hold  :  how  came  they  by  the  knowledge  of  that  Spirit ; 
yea,  that  there  is  any  Holy  Spirit;  yea,  that  there  is  a  Christ; 
yea,  that  there  is  a  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  one  God  .<* 
Did  they  suck  it  in  with  the  milk  of  their  mother ;  or  did 
angels  whisper  it  in  their  ear  in  the  silent  night  ;  or  did  they 
hear  it  at  the  market-cross,  where  merchandise  and  moneys  are 
talked  of .''  Or  have  they  it  from  the  spheres  above .''  Or 
whence  ?  I  will  answer  the  question  :  they  have  it  from  the 
Bible,  or  from  the  traditions  of  the  Church,  or  from  the  writ- 
ings of  Fox  and  Barclay  and  others  who  were  instructed  by 
the  Bible.     And  when  they  or  their  instructors  discovered 


ITS  FRUITS.  359 

these  things  in  the  Bible,  did  they  find  it  written  there,  that 
after  they  had  discovered  them  they  should  cast  the  Bible 
away  ?  The  Holy  Scriptures  are  God's  word,  to  lead  us 
unto  God  :  they  are  the  record  of  His  acts,  foreshewing  His 
providence  to  the  end  of  time  :  they  are  the  light  of  the 
Church's  hopes,  and  the  directory  of  her  prayers,  and  the 
treasury  of  the  wisdom  which  the  Spirit  hath  given  to  the 
churches  :  and  as  such  they  are  to  be  devoutly  used,  and 
constantly  believed,  and  acted  upon  in  all  our  hopes  and  de- 
sires, that  we  may  come  into  the  communion  of  the  Father  and 
of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  Nor  are  they  then  to  be  set  aside,  but 
to  be  continually  used,  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction, 
and  for  instruction  in  righteousness ;  unto  which  we  ought  to 
bring  all  our  thoughts,  and  words,  and  acts,  that  we  may  dis- 
cover those  which  are  done  in  the  Spirit  from  those  which  are 
done  in  the  flesh.  They  are  a  light  unto  our  feet,  and  a  lamp 
unto  our  path ;  but  they  are  not  the  strength  which  enables 
us  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  God  :  yea,  and  Christ  himself  is  the 
true  light  which  lighted  them,  and  of  whom  they  have  also 
the  oil ;  so  that  I  may  say,  they  are  but  the  lamps  into  which 
He  poureth  the  oil  of  the  Spirit.  They  are  the  food,  for 
man  liveth  by  every  word  of  God ;  but  they  are  not  the  life 
which  desireth  and  digesteth  the  food  :  yea,  and  I  may  say 
that  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ  is  the  only  food,  and  they 
are  but  the  descriptions  of  its  many  excellent  virtues  and 
effects  to  nourish  the  soul.  The  Holy  Scriptures  have  the 
same  relation  to  the  Eternal  Word  of  God,  which  the  letter  of 
a  true-hearted  husband,  written  fairly  and  fully  to  his  wife,  hath 
to  that  husband  himself ;  whose  presence,  and  whose  person, 
and  whose  very  self,  she  greatly  preferreth  to  his  written 
letter,  however  tender  and  sweet.  So  have  we  Christ  by  the 
Spirit,  and  do  greatly  prefer  that  union  with  Him  to  His 
written  epistles ;  which  yet  were  most  necessary  to  bring  us 
acquainted  with  His  love,  and  are  so  still  to  preserve  us  in 
our  duty  to  our  Lord  and  Master. — But  time  doth  not  permit 
me  to  unfold  the  half  of  these  errors.  Only  I  remark,  that 
they  all  come  from  one  source,  which  is,  the  dividing  of  the 
substance  of  the  Godhead,  and  the  supposing  that  any  work 
whatever,  whether  in  creating  or  in  redeeming,  is  perfected 


36o  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

without  the  conjoined  and  combined  operation  of  the  three 
Persons. 

I  now  proceed  to  open  one  or  two  of  the  errors  of  the 
Hke  kind  arising  from  the  separation  of  the  substance  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  from  the  substance  of  the  Father  and  the  Son : 
the  natural  effect  of  which  is  to  introduce  mysticism  in 
every  form,  from  the  highest  Pietism  of  the  Church  of  Rome, 
down  to  the  lowest  Methodism  of  the  Protestant  Revivalists. 
For  if  you  cease  to  regard  the  Spirit  as  proceeding  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  to  work  the  will  of  the  one  and  to  per- 
form the  word  of  the  other ;  if  you  receive  Him  as  an  inde- 
pendent Divinity,  whose  work  is  to  be  seen  within  yourself, 
and  whose  being  is  to  be  thence  demonstrated ;  you  find 
yourself  at  once  lost  in  the  multitude  and  variety  of  your 
inward  feelings  and  emotions,  without  a  rule  to  refer  them  to, 
or  a  model  after  which  to  conform  them.  If  we  do  not  look 
upon  the  Son  of  man  as  the  Spirit's  perfect  work,  and  under- 
stand the  Spirit's  procession  to  be  for  the  end  of  begetting 
children  in  His  likeness :  in  what  likeness  then  .-'  How  shall 
we  know  the  wanderings  of  fancy,  the  embodyings  of  imagi- 
nation, the  workings  of  diseased  nerves,  the  peculiarities  of 
bodily  or  mental  constitution,  from  the  sacred  and  constant 
work  of  God .''  This  notion  may  begin  in  the  Spirit,  but  it 
will  end  in  the  flesh.  It  may  begin  in  the  most  lofty  refine- 
ments of  spiritual-mindedness,  but  it  will  end  in  the  lowest 
and  most  brutal  excesses  of  the  natural  man.  So  necessary 
is  it  to  have  one  man,  even  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  to  look  to, 
as  the  great  prototype  of  spiritual  men,  that  I  have  no  hesita- 
tion in  setting  this  view  of  the  work  of  the  Son  of  God  on  a 
level  with,  if  not  above,  the  view  of  Him  as  an  atonement. 
And  therefore  it  is  that  in  this  whole  discourse  on  the  incar- 
nation I  have  sought  to  bring  out  the  humanity  of  Christ  in 
its  true  colours :  while  I  never  lost  sight  of  His  Divinity. 
For,  once  say  that  in  any  part  of  His  life  He  is  not  imitable, 
He  is  not  approachable,  and  you  do  open  the  widest  door  for 
mysticism  and  superstition  to  enter  in.  In  everything  He 
behoved  to  become  like  unto  the  children,  that  He  might  be 
a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God  : 
and  in  everything  He  was  very  man ;  and  being  very  man 


ITS  FRUITS.  361 

begotten  of  the  Spirit,  He  is  to  be  imitated,  yea,  and  to  be 
followed,  in  the  full  faith  of  our  being  in  everything  made  like 
unto  Him.  Those  who  shrink  from  this  aspect  of  their 
Lord,  do  so  because  they  are  grown  nervously  sensitive  upon 
the  subject  of  His  atonement  and  vicarious  suffering ;  but 
the  man  who  apprehendeth  this  matter  aright  is  nothing 
moved,  but  greatly  confirmed  thereby :  for  in  this  very  thing, 
that  every  action  was  a  true  man's  action,  consists  the  merit 
of  it ; — the  merit  that  He  should  have  humbled  His  Divinity, 
or  emptied  it  out,  or  suspended  it,  (express  it  as  you  will,) 
in  order  to  be  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  and  do  a  man's 
action.  But  if  it  be  no  more  a  mere  man's  action,  but 
an  action  proper  to  God,  and  not  to  man,  then  there  is 
no  descent,  nor  humiliation,  nor  merit  in  it  whatever.  This 
is  what  man  can  never  do ;  he  cannot  descend  from  the 
Divine  infinitude  of  being,  because  he  is  a  creature,  and 
cannot  pass  his  bounden  duty  as  a  creature.  Nay,  but 
being  an  abject,  miserable  sinner,  he  must  be  elevated  from 
the  lowest  depths  of  impotency  and  vileness,  in  order  to 
do  the  act  of  a  righteous  man.  Christ  hath  descended 
from  the  height  of  uncreated  being;  but  man  hath  to  be 
raised  from  the  depth  of  hell,  and  the  deadness  of  the 
grave :  and  this  is  the  wide  difference.  The  one,  an  infinite 
condescension,  infinitely  meritorious  ;  the  other,  an  infinite 
elevation,  infinitely  gracious ;  to  which,  nevertheless,  the  in- 
finite condescension  of  Christ  hath  received  an  infinite  power 
to  raise  any  sinner ;  to  raise  him  in  this  present  life  to  the 
same  walk  in  the  Spirit  whereof  He  shewed  us  the  pattern. 
But  this  doctrine  of  the  imitableness  of  Christ's  life  by  every 
spiritual  man  hath  been  so  abased  to  the  mere  copying  of 
His  outward  acts  by  the  natural  man ;  and  it  hath  been  so 
abused  to  bear  down  the  meritoriousness  of  His  obedience, 
and  the  doctrine  of  atonement  thereon  founded  ;  that  our 
divines  and  preachers  have  of  late  shunned  it  so  much  as  to 
have  suffered  the  notion  to  insinuate  itself  of  a  superhuman 
character  in  the  Lord's  life,  which  has  opened  the  flood-gates 
of  mysticism ;  for  wherever  you  are  without  a  model,  there 
have  you  mysticism  :  and  the  only  way  not  to  have  it,  is  to 
preach  the  person  of  Christ  as  the  person  of  every  Christian, 


J 


62  THE  INCARNATION: 


and  the  life  of  Christ  as  the  Hfe  of  every  Christian,  and  the 
being  of  Christ  as  the  being  of  every  Christian.  And  this 
evil  hath  been  much  helped  on  by  the  substitution  of  a 
book  for  a  person;  the  perusal  of  a  book  for  the  perusal 
of  a  person ;  the  worship  of  a  book  for  the  worship  of  a 
person. 

One  word  more  before  I  leave  this  subject.  As  all  idolatry 
among  the  nations  consisteth  in  the  worship  of  the  creature, 
or  the  creation,  instead  of  the  Creator ;  so  all  idolatry  in  the 
Church  consisteth  in  worshipping  the  work  of  the  Divine 
persons,  instead  of  worshipping  the  Divine  persons  themselves 
in  the  work.  The  secret  decree  or  purpose  of  the  Father, 
rather  than  the  Father  in  the  Son,  is  the  object  of  worship  to 
our  Necessitarians  and  Fatalists.  The  written  word,  which 
is  one  work  of  the  Son,  is  the  object  of  worship  to  the  intel- 
lectual Protestants ;  and  the  visible  Church,  which  is  another 
of  His  works,  is  so  to  the  Papists  ;  instead  of  the  Son  Him- 
self, as  heard  in  the  word,  and  seen  in  the  ordinances  of  the 
visible  Church.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  within  the  soul,  or, 
as  it  is  called,  the  rise  and  progress  of  religion  in  the  soul,  is 
the  object  of  worship  to  the  Mystics,  and  the  Friends,  and 
the  great  body  of  the  Evangelicals  and  Methodists ;  instead 
of  the  Spirit,  who  is  seen  in  that  work ;  and  who  is  seen  best 
in  the  perfection  of  the  work,  that  is,  in  the  Son  of  man. 
Now,  the  true  object  of  worship  is  the  Father  and  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  seen  united  and  together  in  all  the 
works  of  creation  groaning  into  a  new  birth,  and  in  all  the 
written  word,  and  in  all  the  responsive  providences,  and  in 
the  visible  Church,  and  in  the  work  of  sanctification  in  the 
soul,  in  all  places  and  in  all  times ;  forasmuch  as  He  hath 
filled  all  things  with  the  manifestations  and  suggestions  of 
Himself,  and  is  in  all  things  therefore  devoutly  to  be  sought, 
and  found,  and  worshipped,  and  adored  :  though  He  be  neither 
Himself  the  space,  nor  the  thing  filling  the  space ;  but  the 
all-originating  Will,  the  all-inclusive  Word,  the  all-manifesting 
Spirit.  And  thus  much  have  I  to  say  concerning  the  proper 
way  of  setting  forth  the  gifts  of  grace  and  peace  which  we 
have  through  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ. 


ITS  FRUITS.  T,6 


0^0 


And  now  the  question  which  ariseth  next  in  order  is  this, 
To  whom,  to  what  class  or  classes  of  men,  are  this  grace  and 
peace  consigned  by  God,  and  to  be  freely  preached  by  the 
ministers  of  the  gospel  ?  It  is,  and  I  dare  say  will  ever  re- 
main, a  question  in  the  Church,  for  what  class  of  persons  these 
gifts  are  intended  :  for  while,  on  the  one  hand,  those  to  whom 
they  are  addressed  are  characterised  by  such  exceeding  high 
and  holy  designations,  t/ie  saints  of  God,  the  faithful  in  Christ 
Jesus,  the  elect  of  God,  chosen  in  Christ  before  the  foundation  oj 
the  xvorld,  as  would  lead  us  to  infer  that  no  one  can  be  in- 
tended but  the  invisible  members  of  Christ,  of  whom  not  one 
shall  perish ;  they  are,  upon  the  other  hand,  so  carefully  ad- 
monished against  every  form  of  sin,  and  rebuked  even  for  the 
most  heinous  transgressions,  yea,  and  positively  accused  of 
renouncing  Christ  and  His  salvation,  and,  in  short,  they  are 
so  dealt  with  according  to  their  conditions  of  frail  and  fallible 
and  erring  mortals,  that  we  are  tempted  to  believe  the  people 
spoken  of,  and  spoken  to,  consisted  of  all  who  had  made  a 
profession  of  Christ,  and  were  found  in  the  communion  and 
fellowship  of  the  churches  to  whom  He  wrote. 

This  I  consider  a  very  important  issue,  and  worthy  of  the 
closest  and  most  exact  examination  ;  forasmuch  as  we  know 
not,  until  this  point  be  settled,  how  much  of  those  writings  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  or  whether  any  part  of  them  at  all,  be  ap- 
plicable to  ourselves.  For  if  it  be  to  the  elect  only  that  they 
were  written,  then  are  all  but  the  elect  cut  off  from  the  profit, 
and  even  from  the  use,  of  them  ;  and  the  reprobate,  being 
wholly  disconnected  from  them,  have  neither  mercy,  nor 
grace,  nor  witness,  nor  condemnation,  nor  any  other  concern, 
good  or  evil,  designed  for  them,  nor  by  them  to  be  derived 
from  these  holy  oracles  of  God.  And,  again,  if  it  be  to  the 
whole  visible  Church  that  they  are  addressed,  to  all  outward 
and  nominal  Christians,  it  is  exceeding  difficult,  without  a 
known  and  felt  violation  of  truth,  to  apply  unto  them  such 
expressions  as  are  scattered  everywhere  throughout  them  : 
such  as,  "  He  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in 
Christ  Jesus;"  "  He  hath  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption 
of  children;"  "He  hath  sealed  us  with  the  Spirit  of  promise;" 
and  many  others,  which  I  may  quote  without  going  beyond 


364  THE  INCARNATION: 

this  very  chapter  from  which  our  text  is  taken.  Now,  to  the 
complete  resolution  and  right  settlement  of  this  question,  I 
request  your  diligent  attention  to  the  following  observations, 
in  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  the  liberty  and  privilege 
which  all  the  baptized  have  in  Christ,  and  point  out  several 
erroneous  views  which  prevail  upon  these  subjects,  ^ 

With  respect  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  of  the  purpose  of  God  it  is  as  essential  a  part  as  the 
manifestation  of  Christ  himself ;  as  independent  upon  condi- 
tions and  accidents,  and  as  sure  to  come  through  the  stormy 
perils  of  this  present  life,  as  was  the  Son  of  God  himself; 
being  foreordained  of  God,  being  sustained  by  her  victorious 
Head,  and  preserved  by  the  almighty  and  irresistible  Spirit. 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  moreover,  that  the  word  of  God,  and 
the  preaching  of  it,  is  the  chief  human  instrument  for  calling 
out  this  Church  of  the  first-born  from  the  world,  of  maintain- 
ing their  separateness  and  sanctification,  and  carrying  them 
forward  to  the  highest  possible  pitch  and  attainment  of  per- 
fection. For  which  end  it  would  be  utterly  disqualified,  did 
it  not  contain  words  and  expressions  for  every  possible  pitch 
of  elevation  of  the  soul  towards  God,  and  for  every  possible 
degree  of  the  love  of  God  for  the  renewed  soul.  And  while 
it  contains  the  forms  of  those  extreme  perfections  of  spiritual 
communion  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son,  it  is  most  ne- 
cessary, at  the  same  time,  that  it  should  also  contain  words 
and  expressions  proper  to  the  first  beginnings  and  lower  de- 
grees of  the  spiritual  life ;  that  is,  milk  for  the  babes,  as  well 
as  strong  meat  for  the  men  of  stature ;  because  it  is  uni- 
versally allowed  that  our  coming  unto'  God  is  a  progress, 
though  the  cause  of  it  be  a  fixed  and  immutable  purpose, 
and  therefore  the  end  and  attainment  of  it  a  most  perfect 
certainty.  Nay,  more,  seeing  the  election  are  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins,  the  children  of  wrath  even  as  others,  it  is 
further  necessary  that  the  word  of  God  should  condescend 
to  an  office  lower  still, — the  office  of  addressing  men  in  their 
natural  condition  ;  and  presenting  forms  of  words,  expressions 
of  affection,  and  terms  of  accommodation,  which  shall  be  pro- 
per to  the  condition  of  a  blind  and  impenitent  sinner,  seeing 
that  is  the  condition  in  which  all  the  election   are  found  at 


ITS  FRUITS.  365 

the  beginning,  and  out  of  which  they  are  to  be  brought  by- 
means  of  the  written  and  the  preached  word.  You  must 
therefore  see  at  once,  that,  in  order  to  this  first  object  of 
calHng  out  and  sanctifying  those  whom  God  hath  chosen 
in  Christ  Jesus  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  it  is  most  ne- 
cessary that  His  word  should  be  exceeding  broad,  containing 
forms  of  thought  and  feeling,  definitions  of  being,  and  advance- 
ments to  higher  being,  through  all  the  stages  of  man,  from 
the  most  wretched  sinner  up  to  the  most  exalted  and  holy 
saint. 

Let  us  now  advance  a  step  further.  The  word  of  God  is 
not  only  for  shewing  God's  glory  in  calling  out  the  election 
from  the  midst  of  the  fallen  and  ruined  race  of  Adam,  but 
likewise  for  shewing  the  glory  of  His  holiness  in  condemning 
the  reprobate  to  eternal  wrath  and  indignation  ;  to  be  a  sweet 
savour  of  Christ,  not  only  in  them  that  be  saved,  but  also  a 
sweet  savour  of  Christ  in  them  that  perish ;  in  whose  perdi- 
dition — I  say  it,  because  I  am  not  ashamed  of  what  the  Holy 
Spirit  hath  written — God  smelleth  a  sweet  savour  of  His 
Son,  as  well  as  in  the  salvation  of  the  others.  To  the  clear- 
ing of  which  nauseated  doctrine,  you  will  understand  that  all 
things  were  made  for  Christ,  and  to  shew  forth  some  part  of 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  that  dwelt  in  Him  from  eternity  ; 
and  that  nothing  existeth  out  of  Christ,  or  in  itself,  or  in  an- 
other, nor  can  exist ;  and,  therefore,  in  the  existence  and  by 
the  existence  of  the  reprobate,  whether  on  the  earth  or  in  hell,  in 
time  or  through  eternity,  Christ  must  be  in  some  way  revealed 
and  His  glory  set  forth,  yea,  and  the  sweetness  of  His  grace 
exhaled.  Wherefore  it  came  to  pass  that  Adam  was  made 
the  type  of  Christ,  and,  being  fallen,  was  promised  Christ ; 
from  the  faith  of  which  the  Church  having  swerved  away,  was 
over^vhelmed  by  Christ  in  the  deluge.  And  again,  to  the  new 
world,  in  Noah,  He  was  preached  ;  and  when  the  world  was 
all  apostate  again,  the  Lord,  having  promised  never  again  to 
bring  a  deluge  of  water,  chose  Abraham,  and  constituted  a 
nation  of  witnesses  to  the  apostate  nations.  Which  elected 
nation  did  itself  become  apostate  ;  and  Christ,  being  mani- 
fested, became  the  foundation  of  the  Gentile  Church  :  which 
is  also  wellnigh  apostate,  and  will  soon  be  reaped  with  the 


366  THE  INCARNATION: 

sickle  of  v'engeance  and  trodden  in  the  wine-press  of  wrath. 
All  this  iteration  and  reiteration  of  the  promise  ending  in  the 
incarnation  of  Christ ;  all  this  work  of  the  Spirit  in  calling  out 
the  election  of  the  Church,  which  shall  end  in  the  coming  of 
Christ  to  judge  ;  is  for  no  other  end  than  to  implicate  all  men 
with  Christ  and  Christ  with  all  men,  in  such  a  manner  as  that 
they  become  apostate  from  Christ,  are  reprobate  by  their  re- 
jection of  Christ,  become  monuments  on  earth  of  His  long- 
suffering,  and  through  eternity  of  His  holy  severity  and 
righteous  judgment.  Which  second  great  head  of  the  Divine 
purpose,  as  essential  to  it  as  the  former,  rightly  to  serve,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  Divine  word  should  contain  within  itself 
all  forms  of  threatening  and  commination  and  curse  :  that  it 
should  shew  the  wickedness  and  the  misery  which  attend  upon 
the  rejection  of  Christ,  and  flow  from  the  denial  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ :  as  well  as  the  blessedness  and  holiness  which  pro- 
ceed from  the  faith  and  honour  of  Him  as  our  Lord  and  our 
God  :  tracing  out  and  deriving  down  the  present  natural  con- 
ditions of  the  world,  and  the  future  misery  of  hell,  from  the 
same  source  of  Christ's  universal  being  and  power  and  mercy, 
no  less  than  the  present  comfortable  and  assured  conditions 
of  the  Church,  with  the  blessedness  of  heaven,  in  the  fulness 
of  which  they  are  fulfilled. 

Taking  these  two  principles  along  with  us,  which  no  one 
acquainted  with  the  will  and  purpose  of  God  can  doubt,  we 
shall  be  at  no  loss  to  account  for  the  mixed  and  most  various 
character  of  the  word  of  God,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  shall 
perceive  that  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  without  wholly  failing 
of  the  end  which  God  hath  in  view  by  the  revelation  of  His 
will.  For,  if  it  had  been  so  constructed  as  to  speak  only  to 
the  election  of  grace,  though  still  it  would  have  maintained 
that  variety  of  character  which  is  necessary  to  their  various 
conditions,  it  w^ould  not  have  served  the  purpose  of  conclud- 
ing the  reprobate,  and  shutting  them  up,  in  sin,  for  their  denial 
and  rejection  of  Christ,  if  so  be  that  the  revelation  of  Christ 
had  no  reference  nor  application  to  them  at  all.  And  the 
consequence  would  be,  that  the  preacher  of  that  word  would 
only  be  a  savour  of  life  unto  life  in  them  that  are  saved, 
but  no  savour  of  death  unto  death  in  them  that  perish.     And 


ITS  FRUITS.  367 

there  would  have  been  no  room  for  Christ  as  the  Judge  of  the 
wicked,  but  only  as  the  Saviour  of  the  righteous,  if  so  be  that 
the  word  beareth  no  witness  against  the  wicked.  And,  more- 
over, as  the  elect  are  in  the  first  place  among  the  wicked,  and 
not  to  be  distinguished  from  them  until  they  are  effectually 
called,  the  word  would  not  speak  even  unto  them,  unless  it 
spake  to  the  conditions  of  the  wicked  with  which  they  are 
begirt  :  so  that  the  notion  can  in  no  way  be  maintained  that 
the  word  of  God  is  for  the  election  only.  It  worketh  the 
fruits  of  righteousness  only  in  them,  while  in  the  reprobate  it 
revealeth  the  hideousness  of  sin  ;  equally  in  both  cases  to  the 
glory  of  God. 

So  much  in  general  with  respect  to  this  question ;  but  it 
may  make  our  reasoning  more  distinct  if  we  take  a  particular 
case,  as  this  epistle,  which  is  addressed  "  To  the  saints  which 
are  at  Ephesus,  and  to  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus" — that  is, 
to  those  in  the  city  of  Ephesus  who  had  been  separated  from 
the  world  by  the  belief  of  the  gospel,  and  set  apart  by  the 
sacrament  of  baptism  to  a  holy  life,  and  the  maintaining  of 
the  truth  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Therefore  are  they  called 
"  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus,"  or  such  as  had  believed  in  Christ 
Jesus.  And  thus  we  find  it  in  almost  all  his  epistles.  Now, 
who  are  designated  by  these  terms  .-"  I  answer,  every  one 
who  had  by  baptism  been  admitted  to  the  Church,  and  were 
found  not  excommunicated  from  the  bosom  of  the  Church — 
reprobate,  as  well  as  elect ;  those  who  shall  stand  fast,  as 
well  as  those  who  shall  fall  away.  "  If  they  fall  away  and 
become  reprobate,  how  could  they  ever  be  called  saints,  and 
faithful  in  Christ  Jesus .''  were  they  at  any  time  of  those  who 
are  chosen  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  to  be  holy  and 
blameless  before  Him  in  love  .-'"  Certainly  not.  "  Why  then 
apply  to  them  an  epistle  which  is  addressed  to  those  amongst 
whom  they  cannot  be  reckoned  .■'"  To  this  question  I  answer: 
That  the  election  is  essentially  invisible  ;  they  are  God's  hid- 
den ones,  who  shall  not  be  made  manifest  till  the  day  of  re- 
demption. Neither  Paul  nor  any  apostle  could  know  who 
were  to  be  raised  in  honour  in  that  day.  And  no  one,  per- 
haps, was  more  frequently  deceived  than  the  apostle  Paul. 
But  he  knew  that  while  the  world  lasted  there  would  be  a 


o 


68  THE  INCARNATION. 


church  and  election  ;  whose  number  being  completed,  the 
world  would  be  judged  and  changed.  He  knew,  also,  that 
this  flock  of  Christ,  which  was  in  the  world,  was  His  peculiar 
charge,  whom  He  is  commanded  to  feed.  He  knew,  more- 
over, that  every  one  who  had  been  introduced  into  the 
Church  of  Christ,  been  enlightened,  and  made  a  partaker  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  was  outwardly,  and  to  the  eye  of  man, 
amongst  the  election,  and  ought,  as  such,  to  be  spoken  to  by 
the  tongue  of  man.  For  if  you  speak  not  to  them  as  to  the 
election,  to  whom  shall  ye  speak  as  such  .-'  not  surely  to  those 
who  are  denying  Christ,  and  standing  afar  off  from  His 
Church.  Nor  by  speaking  to  them  as  such,  do  you  make 
them  such,  but  rather  you  make  them  re'probate  :  you  shew 
them  what  they  ought  to  be  ;  you  make  known  to  them  what 
belongs  to  their  holy  profession  ;  you  shew  them  their  privi- 
leges in  Christ ;  you  stir  them  up  to  higher  attainments  in 
holiness  ;  you  rebuke  them  ;  you  condemn  them  ;  you  do 
the  office  of  a  good  father  unto  his  children,  who  lays  before 
them  the  walk  and  conversation  of  honest  and  honourable 
men  ;  you  do  the  office  of  a  good  master  over  his  household, 
who  lays  out  to  them  what  is  the  duty  of  their  several  voca- 
tions, and  what  is  their  reward  in  fulfilling  His  will.  The 
word  is  not  therefore  defiled  because  you  have  addressed  it 
to  a  wicked  deceiver ;  neither  doth  it  miss  of  its  aim  because 
in  the  spirit  of  sincerity  you  have  spoken  it  to  a  hypocritical 
dissembler  ;  for  it  condemns  the  one,  and  maketh  the  other 
manifest  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  perhaps  of  his  own  con- 
science. It  is  a  merciful  warning  unto  both ;  and  if  un- 
heeded, it  shall  prove  a  count  of  accusation  and  a  ground  of 
sentence  unto  both. 

Observe,  now,  what  terrible  consequences  you  would  fall 
into  if  you  were  to  take  up  the  opposite  position,  and  allege 
that  these  epistles  are  meant,  not  for  the  whole,  but  for  a 
part.  The  question  is.  For  what  part  .-*  who  shall  read  them, 
and  who  shall  not  dare  to  read  them  .''  Into  whose  hands  shall 
this  power  be  given,  of  separating  the  chaff  from  the  wheat  ? 
To  whom  shall  it  be  permitted  to  pull  up  the  tares  which 
grow  amongst  the  wheat }  The  barn  floor  must  not  be 
purged  till  He  whose  fan  is  in  His  hand  shall  appear :  the 


JTS  FRUITS.  369 

tares  and  wheat  must  grow  together  until  the  harvest.  It 
is  one  of  the  monstrous  assumptions  of  the  Papacy,  to 
burn  the  tares,  and  to  say  that  all  which  is  left  behind  is 
wheat ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  there  is  no  salvation  save  in 
their  own  damnable  apostasy,  and  all  therein  shall  be  saved. 
But  we,  who  have  not  drunk  the  strong  wine  of  their  delusion 
that  we  should  believe  a  lie,  hold  that  in  every  Church,  which 
maintaineth  the  faith  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  not  excepting 
the  apostasy  itself,  there  may  be  and  there  are  saints,  there 
may  be  and  there  are  reprobates.  And  we  likewise  hold 
that  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  say  who  is  a  saint  or 
who  is  a  reprobate.  And  we  further  hold,  that  every  one 
who  is  a  reprobate  is  so  because  he  hath  resisted  the  same 
great  and  glorious  working  in  the  Church  which  the  election 
have  not  resisted;  and  that  he  shall  be  judged  as  one  who 
hath  trampled  under  foot  that  wherewith  he  should  have 
been  sanctified.  For  in  this  consisteth  his  very  reprobacy, 
that  he  hath  turned  a  deaf  ear,  and  cast  behind  his  back 
those  most  gracious  words  and  those  most  glorious  privileges 
which  Christ  Jesus,  by  the  Spirit,  had  brought  near,  and 
proffered  to  him  ;  of  which  he  had  professed  the  acceptance, 
and  was  admitted  to  the  enjoyment.  It  is  the  perfect  equality 
of  gifts,  and  advantages,  and  prerogatives,  which  the  one  re- 
jecteth  and  the  other  receiveth,  that  constitutes  the  difference 
between  the  reprobate  and  the  elect,  and  shews  forth  Christ's 
glory  in  the  one  as  well  as  in  the  other.  If  this  word  be  not 
written  to  all  of  the  visible  Church,  therefore,  it  is  written  unto 
none  ;  if  it  is  written  to  any,  it  is  written  unto  all.  It  serveth 
equal  ends  of  God's  glory  in  Christ  to  those  who  reject  as  to 
those  who  receive  ;  and  therefore  is  not  cast  away  upon  any, 
but  is  profitable  unto  all,  though  not  profitable  in  all.  And 
this  I  hold  to  be  the  true  designation  of  this  or  any  other 
apostolical  epistle,  and  the  true  standing  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  towards  those  gifts  of  grace  and  peace,  which  are  the 
fruits  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Second  Person  in  the  God- 
head. 

There  is  one  point  in  which  these  Apostolical  Epistles  essen- 
tially differ  from  the  Gospels  and  the  other  scriptures  ;  from 
not  observing  which  they  have  run  into  many  errors  in  these 
VOL.  V,  2  A 


3  70  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

times.  Being  addressed  unto  churches  of  the  Gentiles,  which 
had  just  been  formed,  or  were  just  forming,  there  are  few  of 
those  appeals  to  a  former  condition  of  the  church,  which  are 
so  frequent  in  the  Prophets  and  the  Gospels,  addressed  to  a 
church  far  gone  in  backsliding  and  apostasy,  and  ready  to  be 
rejected  :  being  addressed  unto  churches  just  gathered  from 
amongst  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles  at  every  risk  of  property 
and  life,  and  who  abode,  as  it  were,  continually  upon  the 
perilous  edge  of  persecution  and  death,  they  speak  the  lan- 
guage of  consolation  and  edification,  of  confidence  and  trust,  as 
to  those  who  had  been  tried  and  proved  for  the  testimony  of 
Christ.  And  yet  I  must  take  exceptions  for  the  churches  of 
the  Corinthians  and  the  Galatians,  who  had  slidden  back 
from  the  ground  where  the  apostle  planted  them.  But  though 
the  churches  in  general  did  then  deserve,  and  the  apostles  did 
address  unto  them,  more  of  gracious  language  than  would  be 
proper  to  this  or  to  any  after  age  of  the  Church,  they  still 
perceive,  and  warn  them  of,  an  apostasy  which  was  about  to 
arise,  of  perilous  times  which  were  ready  to  come.  And  how 
soon  they  came  is  well  manifested  by  our  Lord's  epistles  to 
the  seven  churches  of  Asia,  which  present  two  or  three  of 
them  in  a  very  deplorable  state,  and  speak  to  them  more  of 
the  language  of  warning  and  threatening  than  we  find  in  any 
of  the  Apostolical  Epistles,  save,  perhaps,  that  to  the  Hebrews. 
Which  example  of  our  Lord,  both  in  the  Gospels,  where  He 
speaketh  to  the  Jews  grown  hoary  in  backsliding,  and  in  the 
Apocalypse,  where  He  speaketh  to  the  seven  churches  of 
Asia,  just  entering  upon  the  long  career  through  which  the 
Gentile  church  hath  since  passed,  doth  teach  us  that  it  is  our 
duty  not  to  be  always  speaking  the  language  and  adopting 
the  gracious  manner  which  the  apostles  use  to  the  simple  and 
comparatively  uncontaminated  primitive  church  ;  whose  con- 
dition is  no  longer  represented  in  any  church  under  heaven :  but 
we  ought  to  assume  more  justice  and  severity  and  threatening, 
and  appeal  unto  the  broken  covenant,  and  the  despised  ordi- 
nances, and  the  whole  tottering  framework  of  the  Church. 
Which  is  what  our  evangelical  brethren,  and  a  great  multi- 
tude of  our  sectarians,  will  not  do  :  they  will  speak  the  soft 
language  of  these  epistles,  and  none  more  stern  or  severe. 


ITS  FRUITS.  371 

unto  the  present  church,  which  is  all  but  apostate  ;  which 
hath  hardly  a  feature  left  of  the  primitive  church ;  and  were 
it  not  for  our  sound  and  orthodox  standards,  would  hardly 
be  known  for  a  church  of  Christ  at  all.  They  will  not  assume 
the  prophetical  character  of  discourse,  which  they  hold  as 
utterly  foreign  to  the  Christian  Church,  although  our  Lord 
resumeth  it  in  the  seven  epistles  to  the  Gentile  churches : 
and  I  can  never  find  when  it  was  laid  down ;  but  perceive  a 
coitinual  entreaty  of  the  apostles,  to  all  the  churches,  that 
they  would  search  the  Scriptures,  and  mind  the  things  which 
ha/e  been  spoken  to  them  by  the  holy  prophets. 

And,  observe  what  is  the  consequence  of  this   perversity 
of  using  only  a  portion   of   Scripture    for  the   model   and 
text-book  of  their  discoursings.     Finding  that  the  church  or 
congregation  of  the  baptized  is  not  capable  of  being  spoken 
to  in  such  language  of  consolation  and  edification,  of  en- 
couragement and  commendation,  as  was  proper  to  the  primi- 
tive churches:  and  not  willing  to  go  to  find  their  models 
ii  the  prophets,  who  spoke  to  a  church  in  the  state  in  which 
w^  are  at  present  found ;  they  are  compelled  to  represent  the 
Church  in  the  same  condition  in  which  the  apostles  represent 
theunbelievers,  and  the  heathen,  and  the  persecuting  Jews — 
thatis,  to  unchurch  the  Church  ;  to  deliver  her  from  all  re- 
sponsbilities  ;  to  absolve  her  from  all  covenants ;  to  rid  her 
of  all  \ereditary  burdens ;  to  undo  the  Divine  arguments  of 
a  written  word,  of  a  visible  church,  of  a  religious  education, 
of  the  hly  sacraments,  of  a  Christian  government ;  all  past 
history  d  God's  dealings  with  us  and  our  fathers  to  oblite- 
rate ;  all  I'esent  experience  of  His  chastening,  or  long-suf- 
fering, or  s-acious  providence,  to  hide  ;  and  to  commence 
anew,  as  if  -e  were  in  the  very  condition  of  the  Greek  and 
Roman  heat^ns — which  is  the  grossest   and  most  glaring 
falsehood,  thcrnost  dishonourable  and  prejudicial  misrepre- 
sentation, that  ras  ever  heard  of ;  dishonourable  to  God,  and 
dishonourable  t  the  Church.     But  this  is  not   all   the   evil 
which  springeth  om  the  fantastical  course  of  these  unfledged 
divines   and   ill-i'tructed   stewards:   for,    not  content   with 
treating  the  visibltrhurch  as  the  world— and  so  quitting  all 
scores,  and,  in  trutl  making  her,  not  reprobate  and  apostate 


372  THE  INCARNATION : 

in  the  sight  of  God,  but  in  no  worse  a  state  than  were  the 
heathen  at  first,  when  He  sent  His  gospel  forth  unto  them — 
they  are  forced,  in  the  next  place,  to  imagine  unto  themselves 
some  body  of  persons,  who  may  stand  to  their  wretohed  theory 
and  most  false  hypothesis  in  the  condition  of  the  primitive 
apostolical  converts.    When  they  have  unchurched  the  Church, 
and  treated  it  as  the  world,  they  must  go  to  and  make  a 
Church  for  themselves,  which  they  may  address  as  the  called 
and  chosen  of  the  Lord.     But  how  are  they  to  know  them, 
and  how  are  they  to  mark  them  out .''     They  cannot  baptize 
them  over  again  ;  they  cannot  admit  them  by  themselves  to 
the  sacrament  of  the  Supper  ;  they  cannot  pen  them  together 
in  the  fold  of  the  Church  :  every  ordinance  and  sacrame.it 
which  defineth  the  outward  Church  is  already  appropriated ; 
and  what  shall  they  do  to  make  out  this  church  within  a  church  ; 
where  to  all,  or  almost  all,  their  apostolical  style  of  discours- 
ing is  to  be  addressed  ;  and  for  the  sake  of  which  they  have/ 
neglected  their  duty  to  those  over  whom  they  were  ordainecj 
not  carrying  God's  commissions  unto  them,  but  calling  the^ 
the  world,  instead  of  the  backsliding  but  still  beloved  Churdi, 
the  adulterous  but  still  gently-entreated  Church  ?     What  an 
they  do,  but  define  their  pseudo-church,  their  invisible  visile 
Church,  by  an  artificial  mark  of  their  ov/n  invention  ;  a  jArti- 
cular  manner  of  speaking  one  to  another  ;  particular  bo'ks  to 
be  read  amongst  each  other ;  places  of  assembling  in  /Private 
one  with  another ;  choosing  of  certain  ministers  for  /^eir  fa- 
vourites ;  avoiding  certain  outward  customs  which  tip  church 
tolerates  ;  and  so  diligently  bringing  about  an  excysive  and 
separative  spirit ;  constituting  a  church  within  a  flurch,  and 
endeavouring  to  make  the  invisible  Church  visible  /-the  many 
evils  of  which  I  shall  not  now  insist  upon. 

Now,  this  would  be  perfectly  right  and  pr/^cr,  and  the 
only  course  which  could  be  followed,  in  an  at^state  church, 
which  in  its  very  constitutional  articles  and  d'v  service  had 
departed  from  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus :  foi^^^ample,  in  the 
Papacy,  and  the  Lutheran  churches  on  th^ontinent  which 
have  adopted  Socinianism  ;  where  nothing  'left  for  the  faith- 
ful and  chosen  but  to  separate,  and  constiti^  the  Church  with 
ordinances  amongst  themselves,  as  the  ^formers  did.     But 


ITS  FRUITS. 


o/ J 


when  the  Church  is  truly  founded,  as  I  hold  the  Established 
Churches  of  these  lands  to  be,  and  rightly  arrayed  in  the 
forms  and  offices  of  a  true  and  holy  faith,  it  is  schismatic  and 
sectarian,  and  pregnant  with  all  evil  consequence,  to  follow 
the  same  course :  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  not  deserted, 
and  cannot  desert,  a  house  so  founded  and  erected  ;  though 
He  have  brought  upon  it  barrenness  of  children,  evil  days  of 
adversity,  and  sore  chastisement  of  the  powers  of  this  world, 
and  great  poverty  of  His  Spirit.  To  which  His  judgments  it 
behoveth  us,  watchmen  of  the  city,  set  to  warn  the  people,  to 
give  heed,  and  call  every  man  to  vigilance  and  to  humility,  to 
grief  and  to  lamentation,  to  sackcloth  and  to  ashes,  instead  of 
deserting  this  prophetical  post ;  calling  the  city  forsaken,  and 
abandoned,  and  lifting  up  the  cry  of  "  save  himself  who  can." 
That  is  the  cry  proper  to  Babylon,  foredoomed,  and  ready 
to  be  destroyed :  but  for  us  the  cry  is,  "  Sanctify  ye  a  fast, 
call  a  solemn  assembly,  gather  the  elders,  and  all  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  land,  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  your  God, 
and  cry  unto  the  Lord.  Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the 
Lord,  weep  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  and  let  them 
say.  Spare  thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  give  not  thine  heri- 
tage to  reproach,  that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  them : 
wherefore  should  they  say  among  the  people,  Where  is  their 
God.?" 

Moreover,  there  is  nothing  so  dangerous  as  the  idea  that 
we  are  come  unto  a  company  of  those  who  are  all  Christians 
indeed,  or  that  we  belong  to  a  church  which  containeth  only 
the  election  of  grace.  For  it  leads  directly  to  idolatry,  and 
we  do  at  once  begin  to  worship  it :  we  sacrifice  to  it  our  own 
judgment,  and  lose  sight  of  our  own  responsibility  :  its  oracles 
become  our  oracles ;  its  opinions  our  laws,  its  view  of  the 
gospel  our  gospel ;  its  estimate  of  a  holy  life  our  rule  to  walk 
by ;  its  sanction  of  us  our  assurance  of  salvation ;  and  so 
forth,  throughout  all  the  various  forms  of  idolatry.  I  say  it 
is  essential  to  our  idea  of  the  Church,  that  it  should  contain 
good  and  evil,  and  shall  contain  them  unto  the  end :  it  is 
essential  to  know  that  there  are  reprobates  in  it,  as  well  as 
elect;  that  Satan's  synagogue  is  there,  as  well  as  Christ's 
body ;  that  we  have  a  continual  wardenship  to  fulfil  on  the 


3 74  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

walls  of  Zion ;  that  there  is  an  enemy  in  every  house  in 
Jerusalem  ;  that  Satan  is  lurking  in  the  corner  of  every  street, 
and  hath  a  partaker  in  every  family.  This,  I  say,  is  necessary 
to  the  very  idea  of  the  Church  on  earth,  as  it  is  the  only  true 
account  of  the  Church  on  earth  in  all  ages  and  generations  ; 
and  herein  consisteth  our  desire  and  longing  to  be  removed 
from  it  into  the  temple  of  the  New  Jerusalem  which  is  above. 
Taking  along  with  us  these  views  of  the  great  purpose  and 
intention  of  God's  word,  and  of  the  peculiar  application  of  the 
epistles  written  in  the  infancy  and  comparative  purity  of  the 
Christian  Church,  we  shall  be  at  no  loss  to  understand  in 
what  light  to  consider,  and  in  what  sense  to  use,  those  holy 
Scriptures,  the  fruits  of  the  incarnation,  which  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  gave  them  unto  the  prophets  and  evangelists  and 
apostles,  doth  address  to  the  Church  of  Christ  in  all  ages  and 
in  all  countries  to  whose  knowledge  it  may  come  :  according 
to  that  caution  of  Peter's,  *'  No  prophecy  is  of  any  private  in- 
terpretation ;  for  the  prophecy  came  not  of  old  times  by  the 
will  of  God,  but  holy  men  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost."  From  what  hath  been  said,  it  is  manifestly  my 
duty,  as  an  expositor  of  any  portion  of  the  word,  to  set  forth 
everything  which  is  therein  declared  in  its  full  and  proper 
sense ;  not  lowering  it  to  the  present  state  of  the  Church,  nor 
accommodating  it  in  any  way  to  my  notion  of  the  condition 
of  my  hearers ;  but  declaring  the  truth  as  it  lies  before  me, 
without  palliation  or  without  prejudice,  according  to  the  in- 
sight given  me  thereinto  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  commend- 
ing it  to  every  man's  conscience,  according  to  the  ability  which 
God  may  grant :  when  the  holy  word  concerneth  the  Divine 
purpose,  opening  the  goodness  and  excellence  and  wisdom  of 
the  Divine  purpose ;  when  it  concerneth  the  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  purpose,  discovering  the  beauty  and  fitness  and 
application  thereof  unto  the  wants  of  men  ;  when  it  concerneth 
the  constitution  of  the  Church,  opening  the  policy  and  the 
discipline,  the  comfort  and  the  blessedness  thereof ;  and  Avhen 
it  concerneth  the  practice  of  each  member  of  the  Church  in 
the  relationships  of  the  present  life,  enforcing  and  pressing  the 
same  with  all  urgency  and  request :  and  in  every  case  leaving 
the  truth  which  hath  been  declared  to  the  application  of  the 


ITS  FRUITS.  375 

Holy  Spirit ; — our  business,  as  preachers,  or  teachers,  or  ex- 
positors, being  simply  to  declare  the  truth,  with  all  suitable 
affections  of  earnestness  and  love ;  to  shew  forth  Christ, 
whether  in  the  purpose,  or  in  the  manifestation,  or  in  the  com- 
munity of  the  Church,  or  in  the  holy  life  of  each  member  of 
the  Church ;  Christ  the  first  and  the  last,  the  beginning  and 
the  ending,  the  All  in  all  of  the  work  of  God  :  and  having 
done  so,  to  leave  the  truth  which  hath  been  declared  wholly 
in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  He  may  take  it  and 
apply  it  unto  your  souls ;  which  is  His  high  prerogative,  not 
to  be  intermeddled  with  by  any  man,  because  it  is  His  office 
in  the  work  of  the  blessed  and  eternal  Trinity.  This  is  the 
part  of  all  preachers.  God  grant  them  grace,  for  the  exoner- 
ation of  their  own  souls  and  for  the  growth  of  the  Church  in 
grace,  to  fulfil  His  will ! 

And  yours,  dear  brethren,  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and 
have  taken  upon  you  the  profession  of  godliness,  it  is,  to 
listen  with  all  reverence  to  the  word  which  may  be  spoken 
unto  you  by  my  lips ;  and  to  pray,  that,  like  Lydia's,  your 
heart  may  be  opened  to  receive  it.  Say  not,  "This  is  too 
high  for  me;"  but  rather  say,  "Ah  me,  that  I  should  not 
be  able  to  receive  the  comfort  of  this  gracious  word,  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  hath  indited  for  His  Church  ! "  Still  less 
seek  ye  to  abase  the  glorious  word,  and  to  explain  it  away 
to  suit  your  conditions ;  to  purge  out  of  it  the  mystery  of 
the  Divine  will  and  sovereignty,  the  Divine  foreknowledge 
and  predestination,  till  ye  have  made  it  into  smooth,  sinful 
Arminianism.  You  might  as  well  purge  out  of  it  the  mystery 
of  Christ's  Divinity ;  nay,  I  think,  if  you  do  the  one,  you 
ought  to  do  the  other;  for  I  can  see  no  sufficient  ground 
of  Christ's  Divinity,  save  by  perceiving  that  He  is  the 
beginning  and  the  ending  of  the  Divine  purpose  from 
all  eternity :  which  caring  not  to  recognise,  you  can  only 
recognise  the  manifestation  in  time,  and  so  have  a  tem- 
porary Saviour,  which  is  flat  Socinianism.  You  might  as 
well  purge  out  of  the  word  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
working  in  all  redemption  and  regeneration ;  and  so  bring 
yourself  into  man-worship  and  self-adoration.  O  brethren ! 
God  forbid  that  you  should  deal  so  treacherously,  so  deceit- 


376  THE  INCARNATION: 

fully,  by  the  word  of  God  ;  in  which  there  will  occur  much 
whose  splendour  you  cannot  bear,  much  whose  mystery 
neither  I  nor  you  can  unfold — for  we  do  but  see  through  a 
glass,  dimly ;  and  speak  like  children.  But  shall  we  be 
grieved  hereat  ?  Nay,  we  will  rather  rejoice  ;  saying,  "  This 
sealstill  remaineth  to  be  broken,  and  this  precious  part  of 
the  roll  still  remains  to  be  revealed :  it  is  so  much  excellent 
counsel  which  I  have  yet  to  receive ;  it  is  so  much  precious- 
truth  upon  which  I  have  yet  to  feed  ;  it  is  a  region  of  the 
Divine  glory  into  which  I  have  yet  to  ascend  ;  it  is  a  field  of 
the  Divine  wisdom  which  I  have  yet  to  explore.  Let  me  re- 
joice and  be  glad  that  there  is  so  much  before  me  still  to  be 
attained,  so  much  to  profit  in,  so  much  to  apprehend,  so  much 
to  digest,  so  much  to  prove  me,  so  much  to  sanctify  me.  Indeed, 
I  do  rejoice,  and  will  rejoice,  in  these  mysteries,  though  for  the 
present  I  apprehend  them  not,  though  in  this  life  I  should 
never  apprehend  them  ;  because  I  know  there  be  some  mem- 
bers of  the  body  of  Christ  which  are  nourished  by  them, 
though  I  be  not  :  for  what  am  I  }  .a  poor  unworthy  member 
of  Christ.  I  am  not  the  eye,  I  am  not  the  ear,  I  am  not  the 
tongue.  God  be  praised  that  I  have  any  place  whatever 
in  the  body.  I  will  rejoice,  yea,  and  I  do  rejoice,  that  there 
are  so  many  wiser,  more  profitable,  and  better  instructed 
members  than  I  am  :  and  by  their  example,  who  feed  with 
ravishment  on  these  divine  mysteries  of  election  and  predes- 
tination and  assurance,  I  Avill  stir  myself  up  to  desire  and  to 
pray  for  the  same  light  and  blessedness  :  and  I  am  sure  that 
the  time  is  coming,  either  now  or  hereafter,  when  I  shall  know 
even  as  I  am  known  ;  when  I  shall  put  away  those  childish 
things,  and  become  a  man  of  full  stature  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  I 
will  beware  lest  I  reject  any  of  the  good  counsel  of  God,or  suffer 
myself  to  be  blinded  by  this  man  or  that  man's  conceit  against 
it,  because  then  I  am  so  far  forth  a  reprobate  :  for  if  I  reject 
God's  word,  reject  I  not  God's  Spirit,  and  rebel  I  not  against  the 
will  of  the  Father,  and  reprehend  I  not  the  honour  and  fulness 
of  Christ  V  Yes,  truly :  if,  listening  to  any  legal  or  evangelical, 
to  any  worldly  or  Methodistical,  to  any  Arminian  or  Socinian 
glosses ;  if  permitting  yourselves  to  drink  into  the  spirit  of 
these  or  any  other  schools,  you  do  slur  over  in  the  reading,  or 


ITS  FRUITS.  377 

trammel  in  the  hearing,  or  neglect  in  the  meditating,  any  of 
the  mysteries  of  this  word  of  God,  though  most  high  and  dif- 
ficult to  be  searched  into,  then  I  testify  that  you  are  saying 
unto  the  Lord,  "  Hitherto  shalt  Thou  come  and  no  further ; " 
you  are  preferring  the  darkness  to  the  light ;  you  are  grieving 
the  Holy  Spirit,  putting  your  souls  in  the  most  imminent 
peril,  and  doing  your  part  to  land  yourselves  among  the  re- 
probate. But  if  the  wickedest,  the  most  lukewarm,  and  the 
most  timorous  Christian  who  now  heareth  me,  will,  in  a  humble 
and  teachable  spirit,  say  unto  the  Lord,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy 
servant  heareth  ;"  though  he  were  a  babe  like  Samuel,  and  like 
Samuel  had  never  before  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  speak- 
ing unto  his  soul — if  he  will  say,  "  Oh  that  the  entering  in  of 
Thy  word  might  give  understanding  to  the  simple!" — then 
let  that  poor  and  contrite  soul  know  assuredly  that  he  is  on 
the  way  which  leadeth  into  the  secret  pavilion  of  the  temple 
of  the  Lord,  and  is  growing  out  of  the  blindness  and  dead- 
ness  of  nature  into  the  life  and  light  of  the  chosen  of  God. 
And  if  the  strongest,  most  wise,  and  enlarged  spirit  in  this 
church  will  do  the  same,  he  shall  become  mightier  still :  ac- 
cording to  the  saying  of  the  prophet,  "  Every  man  shall 
become  as  David,  and  David  shall  become  as  God."  Oh, 
then,  my  beloved,  deal  fairly  by  the  word  :  give  it  law,  give 
it  liberty.  Blame  and  censure  me  ;  cut  me  to  pieces  with 
your  criticisms,  and  blow  me  to  atoms  with  the  breath  of 
your  scorn  ;  but,  oh,  meddle  not  with  the  word  and  wisdom 
of  God  !  Yet  while  I  say  so,  I  also  say,  take  heed  how  you 
hear,  because  I  believe  God  will  speak  the  truth  by  me  for 
your  sakes,  if  you  desire  to  hear  and  to  learn  the  truth. 
Thus  have  I  given  you  liberty,  O  children  of  Christ,  to  feed 
upon  the  word  of  Christ ;  every  one  according  to  his  present 
appetite  and  digestion  ;  no  one  envying  his  brother's  portion, 
or  desiring  to  measure  his  brother's  wealth  by  his  own  poverty. 
I  have  put  you  all  between  the  conditions  .of  election  and 
reprobacy :  all,  all  who  are  baptized  into  Christ  Jesus,  and 
wait  upon  these  ordinances.  The  word  will  either  prove 
your  quickening  into  life  eternal,  or  your  condemnation  unto 
death  eternal.  All  of  us  stand  alike  tempted,  alike  invited  : 
there  is  an  election,  and  there  is  a  reprobation  amongst  us: 


378  THE  INCARNATION: 

and  the  reception  of  this  holy  word  will  separate  the  one 
from  the  other  in  time  and  in  eternity. 


PART  III. 

Having  thus  discoursed  of  grace  and  peace,  the  substantial 
fruits  of  the  incarnation  ;  and  justified  the  full  and  free  preach- 
ing thereof  unto  the  Church ;  I  would  say  a  word,  before 
concluding,  upon  the  saving  application  of  them  to  the  heart 
of  every  believer.  In  which  office,  as  in  every  other,  I  would 
rather  walk  under  the  guidance  of  God's  word,  than  commit 
myself  to  my  own  judgment ;  especially  as  I  have  found  in 
the  Epistle  to  Titus  a  passage  in  which  the  apostle  Paul  sets 
himself  to  delineate,  and  in  his  own  most  comprehensive 
manner  doth  include  in  a  few  words,  the  whole  of  this  subject, 
(chap.  ii.  1 1-14,)  "  For  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation 
hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us,  that,  denying  ungodli- 
ness and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously, 
and  godly,  in  this  present  world ;  looking  for  that  blessed 
hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ;  who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  pecu- 
liar people,  zealous  of  good  works."  Let  us  endeavour  to 
gather  up  the  parts  of  this  apostolical  delineation  of  grace. 
The  first  characteristic  of  it  is,  that  "  it  bringeth  salva- 
tion ;"  according  as  it  is  elsewhere  written,  "  By  grace  are 
ye  saved,  through  faith  ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves  ;  it  is 
the  gift  of  God  :  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast." 
Grace,  we  have  shewn  above,  is  the  affection  of  the  Divine 
mind,  or  attribute  of  His  being,  from  which  our  salva- 
tion proceedeth;  which  moveth  His  will  thereto,  determineth 
the  method,  informeth  all  the  parts  of  the  plan,  is  mani- 
fested through  all  the  progress  of  the  work,  is  crowned  in 
its  ultimate  accomplishment,  is  now  nobly  confessed  by  all 
the  saved,  and  standeth  gloriously  revealed  in  the  mighty 
fruits  and  issues  of  the  work  through  eternity.  And  while 
the  stupendous  fabric  of  all  our  salv^ation  hath  its  foundation 
laid,  and  its  walls  upbuilded,  and  its  corner-stone  brought 


ITS  FRUITS.  379 

out,  in  the  grace  of  God,  whereby  we  are  freely  justified  ;  it 
Cometh  to  us,  it  apprehendeth  and  layeth  hold  on  us,  in  the 
way  of  faith ;  and  by  the  progress  and  increase  of  our  faith, 
from  faith  to  faith,  in  each  man  who  is  polished  after  the 
similitude  of  the  Chief  Head-stone,  in  order  to  be  builded 
into  the  temple  which  is  building  to  the  honour  and  the 
glory  of  the  grace  of  God,  I  say,  the  almighty  all-working 
Spirit,  in  making  any  of  us  who  are  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins  a  subject  of  Divine  grace,  doth  proceed  by  working  in  us 
faith  in  God,  who  quickeneth  the  dead ;  and  in  Christ  Jesus, 
who  died  for  our  sins,  and  was  raised  for  our  justification,  and 
who  hath  received  "  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  to  grant 
repentance  and  remission  of  sins,"  and  the  fruits  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  By  the  way  of  faith  in  an  outward  work  of  salvation 
done,  and  scheme  of  salvation  revealed.  He  proceedeth  ;  not 
by  the  way  of  good  works,  obedience  of  the  law,  good  char- 
acter, moral  worth,  honourable  reputation,  or  some  other 
thing  within  us,  in  which  all  men  do  by  nature  boast  and 
build  themselves  up.  As  to  ourselves.  His  first  lesson  is, 
that  we  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  objects  of  the  Divine 
wrath  and  indignation :  and  even  this  lesson  He  can  only 
teach  us  by  reflection  from  the  law,  as  it  was  exemplified 
and  fulfilled  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ;  so  that  even  the  truth 
of  our  natural  perdition  floweth  from  an  act  of  faith  in  the 
grace  of  God  manifested  in  Christ  Jesus.  When  we  see  our 
natural  deadness,  the  work  of  our  salvation  is  a  good  way  ad- 
vanced ;  the  old  man  is  stripped  and  crowned  with  thorns, 
and  crucified  ;  and  this  argues  the  new  man  to  be  born,  yea, 
lively,  and  come  to  no  mean  stature  in  our  souls.  But  how 
came  that  new  man  to  be  quickened  in  death,  and  reared  in 
the  corruption  of  a  tomb  .''  Can  any  one  say  that  he  had  any 
hand  in  it,  or  with  all  his  might  could  have  helped  it  on  a 
jot;  or  that  any  power  or  might,  less  than  the  Almighty 
Spirit  of  free  grace,  sent  to  the  undeserving  and  the  rebel- 
lious, and  working  in  us  against  the  main  drift  and  tendency 
of  our  nature  and  the  very  principle  of  our  being,  hath  brought 
it  to  pass,  through  a  continual  exercise  of  faith  upon  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  upon  His  life  for  righteousness,  His  death 
for  atonement,  His  resurrection  for  quickening  the  dead,  and 


o 


80  THE  INCARNA  TION : 


His  glory  for  the  present  hope  and  future  fruition  of  all  the 
people  whom  His  life  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  a  broken 
law,  whom  His  death  justified,  whom  the  power  of  His  resur- 
rection regenerated,  and  whom  the  hope  of  His  glory  saved  ? 
This  is  what  is  meant  in  the  first  operation  of  the  grace  of 
God,  "  that  it  bringeth  salvation," — that  it  saveth  us  through 
faith. 

It  is  next  written,  in  this  same  large  description  of  the 
work  of  grace,  that  it  "  hath  appeared  unto  all  men  ;"  or, 
that  it  is  universal  in  its  epiphany  or  manifestation  ; — that 
this  feature  of  the  Divine  mind,  or  attribute  of  His  substan- 
tial being,  called  grace,  is  an  essential  part  of  Himself,  which 
first  came  to  our  knowledge,  or  the  knowledge  of  any  crea- 
ture, in  the  person  and  work  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  hath  been  held  up  to  the  obser\'ation  and  pre- 
sented to  the  acceptance  of  all  men  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the 
Church,  which  is  His  living  temple.  For  all  that  went  before 
the  coming  of  Christ,  in  the  dispensation  of  God  unto  the 
fallen  world  by  means  of  angels,  was  but  the  clearing  of  the 
ground  and  preparing  of  the  way  for  the  dispensation  of  grace 
that  was  to  come  impersonified  and  incarnate  in  the  Word. 
The  law,  which  came  by  Moses,  gave  the  forms  of  righteous- 
ness which  should  condemn  every  other  man  to  death,  but 
which  should  not  be  able  to  lay  a  hand  upon  the  skirt  of 
Christ's  garment  :  the  word  of  prophecy  was  but  the  testi- 
mony of  promise  and  ground  of  hope  for  the  world  to  expect 
Him  and  believe  upon  Him  :  and  the  grace  in  Jesus  Christ, 
thus  announced  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  fore- 
shadowed and  defined  by  every  word  and  act  of  God,  hath, 
since  His  resurrection,  over-canopied  the  world,  and  is  free  to 
every  man's  use,  free  as  the  vital  air  of  heaven.  He  came  not 
to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world  ;  that  whosoever 
believeth  on  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life. 
All  that  holdeth  of  the  former  advent  is  grace,  is  free  grace, 
is  universal  and  unconditional  grace,  unto  all  men  to  whom 
the  knowledge  of  it  may  come  :  and  it  hath  not  been  hid  in  a 
corner,  that  it  should  not  come  unto  all,  but  hath  for  these 
eighteen  hundred  years  been  "  as  a  city  set  upon  a  hill  which 
cannot  be  hid."     We,  who  hold  the  doctrine  of  an  election  and 


ITS  FRUITS.  381 

a  reprobation  amongst  the  children  of  men,  hold  of  necessity 
the  universality  of  the  presentation  of  the  free  grace  of  God  ; 
because  it  is  by  the  acceptance  of  that  grace  the  elect  are 
made  manifest,  and  by  the  rejection  of  it  that  the  reprobate 
are  made  manifest ;  which  revelation  of  both  classes  could  not 
come  to  pass  without  the  presentation  of  it  to  all  mankind. 
This  mystery  of  election  and  reprobation  is  entirely  depen- 
dent upon  the  universality  of  the  free  gift  and  offer  of  grace, 
and  preaching  of  the  gospel  unto  all ;  and  cometh  out  of  it, 
dawning  and  clearing  itself  upon  those  who  will  be  at  the 
pains  to  read  the  Holy  Scriptures,  or  who  will  have  the 
patience  to  reflect  upon  what  they  already  believe.  You  be- 
lieve, do  you,  that  the  manifestation  of  the  grace  is  freely 
made  unto  all  .-*  "  Yes."  And  what  cometh  of  those  who 
reject  it.?  "  They  are  reprobates."  And  what  cometh  of  those 
who  receive  it .''  "  They  are  elect."  Well  now,  did  God  con- 
template this  issue  of  it,  or  another ;  did  He  reveal  this  issue 
of  it,  or  another }  Surely  He  must  both  contemplate  and 
reveal  the  truth.  Therefore  His  word  speaketh  of  an  elec- 
tion and  a  reprobation  as  about  to  be  manifested  by  the 
free  preaching  of  His  grace  unto  all  men  in  Jesus  Christ. 
And  a  very  gracious,  holy,  and  most  necessary  part  of  the 
revelation  it  is,  teaching  that  salvation  is  not  made  easy 
by  the  gospel — which  is  the  root  of  all  errors  ;  I  may  say, 
the  practical  error  of  all,  save  the  election — but  that  men  are  by 
the  gospel  placed  under  more  awful  sanctions,  equipoised,  as 
it  were,  between  the  top  of  heaven  and  the  depth  of  hell ;  the 
field  on  which  the  powers  of  heaven  and  hell  are  to  con- 
tend for  the  victory ;  the  substance  out  of  which  a  monu- 
ment is  to  be  built  to  the  inexhaustible  grace  or  inexhaus- 
tible severity  of  God.  And  those  who,  hiding  the  principles 
and  the  issues  of  election  and  reprobation,  and  at  the  same 
time  preaching  the  gospel  freely  unto  all,  do  their  utmost 
to  keep  the  world  in  the  delusion  that  salvation  is  made  easy 
and  attainable  at  any  time,  do  bring  the  Church  into  a  state 
of  ease  and  inactivity,  of  sleep  and  death,  such  as  we  now 
behold  it  to  be  in.  And  it  is  to  preach  only  one-half  of  the 
glory  of  God  impersonated  in  Christ ;  whereof  the  world  hath 
had  but  the  part  of  grace  revealed  at  the  former  advent,  and 


382  THE  INCARNATION: 

waiteth  for  the  other  part,  of  judgment  and  severity,  against 
the  advent  yet  to  come.  His  birth  in  Bethlehem  ushered  in 
the  day  of  grace  ;  His  coming  in  the  clouds  shall  usher  in 
the  day  of  judgment :  and  these  two  make  up  the  manifesta- 
tion of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  in  the 
body  of  the  Son  of  man.  If  they  will  sum  up  the  whole,  and 
preach  the  result  unto  the  Church,  let  them  station  them- 
selves under  the  whole,  let  them  imderstand  the  whole  ;  and 
from  the  consummation  look  back  and  tell  what  hath  passed  ; 
and  see  if  they  can  include  it  all  under  these  words,  "  Grace 
unto  all,"  They  must  add,  "  The  grace  of  election  unto 
some,  the  severity  of  reprobation  unto  many  ;"  "  God  in  Christ 
a  God  of  mercy,  and  a  God  of  justice  ;"  "a  Father,  and  a  con- 
suming fire;"  "the  Saviour  of  the  Church,  and  the  destroyer  of 
the  world ;"  "  the  builder  up  of  heaven,  and  the  builder  up  of 
hell" — all  to  His  glory;  all  to  the  glory  of  His  holiness  and 
truth ;  and  equally  of  the  essence  and  substance  of  His  being. 
Now,  as  I  take  it,  beloved  brethren,  that  the  evening  shadows 
of  the  day  of  grace  are  darkening  around  us  ;  and  the  temple 
gate,  though  loth,  is  ready  to  be  shut,  after  which  no  one 
shall  be  able  to  enter  ;  and  the  night  is  thickening  ;  and  the 
sword  of  the  angel  of  judgment  is  in  his  hand  ;  and  the  snare 
of  the  tempter  is  spreading  ;  and  the  pit  of  the  destroyer  is 
widening  its  mouth  ;  and  the  time  of  the  end  is  at  hand  ;  we 
hold  out,  as  it  were,  a  last  momentary  invitation,  and  blow  a 
final  blast,  mingled  of  entreating  pity  and  warning,  around 
the  world,  saying,  "  Now  or  never ;  the  day  is  far  spent,  and 
the  night  is  at  hand  :  haste !  haste  for  your  lives  !  enterf 
enter  into  the  ark  !  for  the  heavens  are  thick,  and  the  hail  is 
coming  down  upon  the  forest,  and  the  city  is  low  in  a  low 
place." 

Furthermore,  with  respect  to  the  application  of  this  grace 
to  the  souls  of  men,  it  is  thus  written  in  the  same  large  and 
beautiful  description  :  "  Teaching  us,  that  denying  ungodli- 
ness and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously, 
and  godly,  in  this  present  world."  These  words  contain  the 
power  of  Divine  grace  upon  the  heart  of  the  believer  by  the 
operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  which  is  very  often  mistaken 
for  the  beginning,  and  sometimes  for  the  whole  of  Divine 


ITS  FRUITS.  383 

grace ;  but  which  is,  in  truth,  not  a  beginning  at  all,  and 
only  a  very  small  part  of  the  whole ;  the  only  fountain,  and 
origin,  and  principle,  being,  as  hath  been  said,  in  the  Divine 
substance,  of  which  we  do  now  know  grace  to  be  as  essential 
a  part  as  His  power  or  sovereignty  or  justice.  The  only 
principle  or  beginning  of  it  is  in  the  will  of  God,  in  the  good 
pleasure  of  His  will.  It  is  proper  for  God  so  to  be,  and  it  is 
pleasant  for  Him  so  to  reveal  Himself;  for  the  which  His  will 
is  ever  devoutly  to  be  worshipped,  and  adored,  and  yielded 
to,  as  the  greatest  goodness  and  most  perfect  wisdom.  As 
little  is  the  work  of  grace  in  our  souls  by  the  Holy  Ghost  the 
beginning  or  the  fulness  of  its  majiifestatioit ;  for  it  was  first 
and  fully  manifested  in  Christ,  and  is  derived  unto  us  from 
that  inexhaustible  fulness  of  which  we  have  received,  and 
grace  for  grace.  The  portion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  any 
one  receiveth,  which  all  of  us  receive,  which  all  the  Church 
since  Pentecost  hath  received,  is  only  a  part  of  that  might 
and  power,  and  overflowing  fulness  of  grace,  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  shall  flow  out  of  Him  upon  and  into  all  the  elect 
creatures  of  the  universe  of  God.  If  you  want,  therefore,  to 
know  the  size,  or  to  measure  the  dimensions,  of  that  grace  of 
God  which  hath  appeared  unto  all  men,  bringing  salvation,  I 
pray  you  not  to  be  prying  and  poring  about  the  narrow 
bounds  of  your  own  imperfect  sanctification,  but  to  consider 
the  man  Christ  Jesus ;  who,  though  in  the  form  of  God,  and 
thinking  it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  became  a  very 
man,  of  low,  and  mean,  and  suflering  conditions ;  and  being 
found  in  the  dejected  and  desolate  estate  of  a  condemned 
criminal,  crucified  on  an  accursed  tree,  was  thence  exalted  at 
once  unto  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  on  high, 
to  rule  and  to  govern,  to  forgive  and  to  save,  and  eternally  to 
manifest  the  attributes  and  perfections,  to  declare  and  to  exe- 
cute the  will,  of  the  Almighty  and  Eternal  God.  Look  on 
that,  I  say,  and  consider  its  dimensions,  if  you  would  have  an 
outward  estimate  of  that  attribute  of  grace,  which  is  in  the 
essential  substance  of  God,  and  whose  effluence  is  from  the 
will  of  God,  by  His  only-begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ,  unto  all 
and  upon  all  who  believe. 

Having  guarded  this  topic  of  our  discourse,  to  prevent  our 


384  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

selfishness  from  making  it  the  whole  because  it  is  the  part 
which  concerneth  self,  I  now  proceed  to  open  the  application 
of  grace  to  the  sinner  :  which  is  here  given  as  a  process  of 
teaching,  or  discipline,  working  two  effects ;  which  are,  first, 
the  "  denying  of  ungodly  and  worldly  lusts,  and  the  living 
soberly,  and  righteously,  and  godly,  in  this  present  world;" 
secondly,  the  "  looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glori- 
ous appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 
The  same  twofold  division  of  the  work  of  grace  I  find  in  an- 
other part  of  Scripture,  (i  Thess.  i.  9,  10)  :  "  How  ye  turned 
to  God  from  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God  ;  and  to 
wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven."  Now,  with  respect  to  the 
power  by  which  either,  or  both,  of  these  Divine  effects  is 
wrought  in  us,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  the  power  of 
God,  and  the  peculiar  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  For,  first, 
that  we  have  no  power  to  produce  the  whole,  or  any  part,  of 
this  grace  in  ourselves,  is  manifest  from  our  Lord's  own  de- 
claration, "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing :"  and  that  we 
cannot  fetch  ourselves  to  Him,  or  link  our  dead  affections  to 
His  living  power,  is  manifest  from  that  other  saying  of  His, 
"  No  man  can  come  unto  me  except  the  Father  which  hath 
sent  me  draw  him."  And  that  it  is  the  work  of  God  to  do 
this,  which  in  and  of  ourselves  we  cannot  do,  is  manifest  from 
the  passage  of  this  epistle  already  quoted  :  "  Ye  are  saved 
by  grace,  through  faith ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is 
the  gift  of  God  :  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast : 
for  we  are  his  workmanship,  created  unto  good  works 
(or  fashioned  upon  good  works,)  which  God  hath  before 
ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them."  And  again,  in  an- 
other epistle  :  "  It  is  God  that  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do 
of  his  good  pleasure."  Now  that  it  is  the  proper  office  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  third  Person  in  the  Divine  Substance,  to 
produce  all  faith,  to  teach  all  truth,  and  to  work  all  goodness 
in  the  souls  of  dead  men,  is  manifest  from  our  Lord's  defini- 
tion of  His  office  in  various  parts  of  His  last  discourse :  as, 
for  example,  (John  xiv.  26):  "  But  the  Comforter,  which  is  the 
Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  my  name,  he  shall 
teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remem- 
brance, whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  you."      Again,  (John 


ITS  FRUITS.  3S5 

xvi.  13)  :  "  Howbeit,  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he 
will  guide  you  into  all  truth  :  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  him- 
self ;  but  whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak :  and 
he  will  shew  you  things  to  come.     He  shall  glorify  me :  for 
he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you."     And, 
again,  the  apostle  John,  in  his  first  epistle  (i   John  ii.  20,  27) 
traceth  all  saving  knowledge  and  good  fruits,  and  permanency 
therein,  to  the  same  Almighty  Teacher,  in  these  words  :  "  But 
ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all 
things."     "But  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received  of  him 
abideth  in  you  :  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you  : 
but  as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is 
truth,  and   is  no  lie,  and   even  as  it  hath  taught   you,  ye 
shall  abide  in  him."     And  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  work 
of   the    Spirit   in    enlightening   and    informing   the    natural 
darkness  of  the  soul  is  stated,  yea,  and  the  measure  and  the 
dimensions  of  the  putting  forth  thereof  in  the  regeneration  of 
the  sinner,  is  given,  in  this  very  chapter,  to  be  no  less  than 
that  which  was  put  forth  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ : 
"  And  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  to  us- 
ward  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty 
power  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from 
the  dead,"  (verses  19,  20.)     How  incongruous  were  it,  to  use 
such  language  as  this,  if  the  conversion  of  a  sinner  unto  God, 
and  his  building  up  in  holiness  and  righteousness,  were  a 
work  to  which  he  himself  could  lend  a  hand ;  in  which  he 
might  go  hand  in  hand  with  God ;  or,  as  our  unchristened 
divines,  the  disgrace  of  our  churches,  say,  take  the  lead  of 
God !     I  utterly  repudiate  all  such  damnable  doctrine :  and 
anathematise  all  the  preachers  of  it,  as  the  defacers  and  de- 
famers  of  God's  grace,  and  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ. 
For  herein  grace  is  grace,  that  it  is  free  and  undeserved,  yea, 
that  it  is  something  beyond  and  above  our  deserving.    This  is 
the  essence  of  grace  even  in  a  man ;  but  in  God  the  essence 
of  it  is,  that  it  passeth  infinitely  beyond,  and  riseth  infinitely 
above,  our  deservings,  which  are  the  depth  of  hell,  whence 
this  grace  of  His  doth  exalt  us  to  the  height  of  heaven.    How 
infinitely,  then,  do  they  disparage  that  boundless  ocean  of 
the  Divine  mercy  and  forgiveness,  and  grace  and  goodness, 
VOL.  V.  2  B 


386  THE  INCARNATION: 

who  entreat  of  it  as  something  which  we  earn  and  deserve, 
and  which  is  never  bestowed  upon  any  who  have  not  laboured 
for  it  by  the  self-denials,  penances,  devotions,  beliefs,  and 
hopes  of  their  life  !  Thou  blind  leader  of  the  blind,  hast  thou 
not  eyes  to  read  the  holy  page,  where  it  is  written,  that  the 
grace  of  God  schooleth  us  like  children  to  deny  ungodliness 
and  worldly  lusts,  to  which  we  are  as  much  inclined  and  devot- 
ed as  children  are  to  neglect  their  lesson  and  to  run  wild  after 
folly  and  idleness  ?  Or  knowest  thou  not  that  word  of  thy 
Saviour,  "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  should  believe  in 
him  whom  he  hath  sent ;"  or  that  other  word,  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again,  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  before  ye  can  see  the 
kingdom  of  God  ? "  And  knowest  thou  not  that  word,  "  You 
hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ? " 
Now,  take  to  thy  logic,  and  resolve  me,  if  He  that  creates  the 
seed  is  not  the  same  who  is  the  creator  of  the  tree  that  grows 
out  of  it ;  if  He  that  quickens  the  life  of  the  child  is  not  the 
creator  of  the  man  into  whom  the  child  waxeth ;  if  He  that 
raiseth  the  dead  is  not  the  resurrection  and  the  life  of  Him 
whom  He  hath  raised  ?  Or  is  my  child  to  disallow  me  as  his 
father,  because  he  chews  and  digests  the  meat  which  I  pro- 
vide for  him,  and  wears  the  clothes  which  I  furnish  him  ? 
And  is  the  child  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to 
cast  off  the  obligation  to  God,  and  insist  for  a  share  of  the 
work,  because  He  is  made  to  grow  up  into  full  stature  by  the 
continuance  of  that  Almighty  Power  which  produced  Him 
out  of  nothing  ?  Oh  thou  Atheist !  then,  after  Adam,  the 
seed  of  man  ;  and  after  the  first  formed  animal,  the  seed  of 
all  future  creatures ;  and  after  the  first  created  plants,  the 
seed  of  all  vegetables,  had  been  formed  in  six  days :  going  on 
ever  since  until  this  hour  procreating  and  producing  and  in- 
creasing and  multiplying,  according  to  the  law  and  provision 
which  God  had  appointed  to  them,  they  become  sharers,  co- 
operators,  fellow-creators  with  God ;  having  a  part  in  their 
own  origination,  and  beholden  unto  themselves  as  well  as 
unto  Him — yea,  to  Him  for  six  days'  work  only ;  to  them- 
selves for  six  thousand  years'  work,  and  whatever  ages  are 
yet  to  run  ?  Oh,  but  thou  art  an  equal  distributor  and  ap- 
portioner  between  God  and  the  creatures !   a  rare  logician 


ITS  FRUITS.  3S7 

to  boot !  and  a  most  famous  Atheist !     But,  to  return  to  the 
subject  of  the  apphcation  and  appropriation  of  grace. 

Its  first  operation  is  in  faith ;  and  that  not  the  faith  of  so 
many  written  books,  but  faith  in  the  person  and  the  work  of 
Jesus  Christ,  in  whom,  as  the  great  object,  all  grace  is  mani- 
fested. You  may  as  well  expect  to  have  knowledge  without 
a  thing  to  know,  as  faith  without  an  object  to  believe  upon. 
The  object  of  all  faith  is  "  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  himself  for 
us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify 
unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  As 
to  the  written  book,  it  is  but  the  description  of  His  person, 
and  the  unfolding  of  His  work,  to  lead  us  to  a  knowledge  of 
Him ;  but  there  is  no  faith  until  we  know  Him  and  receive 
Him  as  the  only  Son  of  God,  and  Saviour  of  sinners — the 
manifestation  of  the  grace  of  the  Father,  and  the  fountain 
from  which  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  floweth  into  our 
souls.  And  this  faith  is  not  to  be  produced  in  us  by  any 
reading  or  conning  of  the  pages  of  a  book,  or  hearing  the 
subjects  of  it  preached  upon,  or  any  outward  ordinance  or 
mean ;  which  are  at  best  but  the  fountains  that  contain  the 
water,  shewing  us  where  the  water  of  life  is  to  be  found :  but 
the  water  of  life  itself  is  not  in  us,  nor  anywhere  in  the  world, 
that  it  should  be  found  out;  not  in  the  hands  of  any  priesthood, 
that  it  should  be  purchased;  nor  of  any  men,  that  it  should  be 
dispensed  ;  but  vHth  God  is  the  pure  fountain  of  His  grace,  and 
from  Christ  only  can  it  be  received,  by  an  act  of  faith  upon  Him, 
through  the  channels  by  which  He  ordinarily  communicates  it, 
and,  when  He  pleaseth,  directly  flowing  into  the  soul  without 
any  such  means.  Now  this  faith  upon  Christ  Jesus  is  the 
gift  of  the  Father,  communicated  by  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost :  Christ  is  the  gift  of  the  fulness  of  grace  ;  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  dispenser  of  its  measures  to  His  people  : 
and  if  we  look  for  it  from  any  other  quarter,  be  it  book,  ordi- 
nance, effort  of  our  own  will,  help  of  others,  or  power  of 
nature,  we  do  feed  on  the  east-wind  of  emptiness  and  barren- 
ness. Nor  is  it  enough  that  God  hath  presented  the  object 
of  all  faith  in  His  own  Son  ;  He  must  also  give  the  eye  to 
behold,  the  ear  to  hear,  the  hands  to  handle,  the  heart  to  re- 
ceive.    Which  He  doth  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  you  must 


388  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION  : 

expect  from  the  same  principle  of  grace  in  the  Divine  sub- 
stance from  which  the  Son  proceeded.  Because  God  is  gra- 
cious, the  Son  of  God  came  forth  to  seek  and  save  a  lost 
world :  because  God  is  gracious,  the  Holy  Spirit  came  forth 
to  enable  that  low  and  lost  world  to  lay  hold  on  Christ  Jesus 
for  salvation.  He  that  denies  faith  to  be  the  only  operation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  denies  the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  as 
he  that  denies  Christ  to  be  the  only  object  of  faith,  denies  the 
office  of  Christ :  and  no  one  who  acknowledgeth  not  both  of 
these,  doth  or  can  acknowledge  the  grace  of  God  :  he  either 
disparages  it  by  the  apprehension  of  a  part  only,  or  he  denies 
it  altogether ;  for  its  wholeness  is  not  manifested  in  the  in- 
carnation and  atonement  of  the  Son  only,  but  requireth  the 
dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  unto  the  Church  to  be  added 
thereto  :  nor  then  is  the  dimension  of  grace  measured,  but 
there  wanteth  to  be  superadded  to  these  two,  the  glory  which 
is  hereafter  to  be  revealed.  It  is  God's  will  to  be  gracious,  it 
is  the  bejie  placitiun,  the  "  good  pleasure "  of  His  will  to  be 
gracious,  that  moveth  the  Father  to  spare  the  presence  and 
permit  the  sacrifice  of  His  Son  :  it  is  the  Son's  delight  to  obey 
His  Father's  will,  tliat  maketh  Himself  become  outwardly 
manifest  in  humiliation  and  death  :  it  is  the  deHght  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  proceed  to  accomplish  and  substantiate  in  out- 
ward acts  that  which  the  Father  hath  willed  a.id  the  Son  hath 
revealed  :  this  is  what  makes  up  the  full  complement  of  the 
Divine  grace ;  and  those  who  become  children  thereof  are 
born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  ilesh,  nor  of  the  will 
of  man,  but  of  God. 

According  as  faith  upon  Christ  Jesus  is  wrought  in  us  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  we  grow  in  grace,  deriving  from  the  great 
ocean  of  His  fulness  that  portion  of  light  and  life  which  the 
Spirit  may  be  pleased  to  apportion  unto  every  man.  And 
being  enlightened  in  the  knowledge  which  is  in  Him,  and 
quickened  with  the  life  which  is  in  Him,  thence  ensueth  first 
a  humiliation  and  a  dying  and  a  crucifixion  of  the  old  man  ; 
a  lowly  descent  from  the  heavenly  places  of  Satanic  usurpa- 
tion, in  which  every  natural  man  is  born ;  an  apprehension  of 
the  monstrous  self-deification  which  we  have  been  prosecut- 
ing, by  making  our  own  will  our  law,  and  exalting  our  reason 


ITS  FRUITS.  389 

to  the  right  hand  of  God's  throne,  yea,  to  the  very  seat  of  His 
Majesty.  This  great  descent  from  the  heavenly  heights  of 
spiritual  wickedness,  groweth  out  of  the  faith  and  know-  , 
ledge  and  meditation  of  Christ's  descent  from  the  bosom 
of  His  Father  to  the  dust  of  death.  The  Spirit  taketh 
Christ's  eternal  oneness  with  and  being  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  and  His  willing  procession  thence  to  be  cruci- 
fied on  the  accursed  tree,  by  wicked  men,  for  the  redemption 
and  salvation  of  wicked  men,  by  the  destruction  of  their 
wickedness — this  great  act  of  love  He  taketh,  and  sheweth  it 
to  our  souls  with  such  mighty  and  efficacious  power,  that  we 
are  constrained  by  the  faith  thereof  to  be  ashamed  and 
grieved  and  horrified  at  our  usurpation  upon  God's  self-exist- 
ing prerogative ;  are  enabled  to  forsake  and  abandon  all 
high  imaginations  of  that  evil  kind  ;  to  come  into  the  condi- 
tions of  a  creature,  and  to  see  ourselves  as  the  most  rebellious 
and  ruined  creatures  ;  to  humble  ourselves,  become  obedient, 
and  to  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  our  Lord's  sufferings ;  to 
crucify  ourselves,  as  He  also  gave  Himself  to  be  crucified  ; 
and  to  die  daily  unto  sin  more  and  more,  by  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  enabling  us  to  apprehend  the  kindred,  and  I 
may  call  it  mother,  grace  in  the  work  of  Christ.  Now,  this  is 
not  an  act,  brethren,  but  it  is  a  work,  which,  like  every  other 
work,  hath  a  beginning — call  it  regeneration,  or  conversion, 
or  awakening,  or  what  you  please — but,  like  every  other 
work,  it  hath  a  working  power,  the  same  which  set  it  on  at 
first ;  and  therefore  the  multitude  do  idly  talk  and  vainly 
preach,  when  they  refer  you  to  a  day  of  conversion  on  which 
they  were  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  a  succession  of  self- 
denying  acts  and  holy  works,  a  life  of  holiness,  which  grew  up 
and  proceeded  from  that  one  act  of  the  Spirit.  No,  it  is  the 
Spirit  working  in  every  act,  and  at  every  time ;  restraining 
nature,  mortifying  nature,  quickening  more  faith,  and  withal 
bringing  more  grace  from  the  ever-full  fountain  ;  maintaining 
the  life,  doing  the  works ;  feeding  his  own  child  ;.  strengthen- 
ing him  against  the  burden  of  sin  and  death  ;  enabling  him 
to  bear  the  oppression  of  the  world  patiently,  and  to  re- 
sist the  devil  successfully,  and  to  triumph  over  sin,  and  to 
fulfil  all  righteousness  :  even  as  in  our  Lord  it  was  by  the 


390  THE  INCARNATION: 

fulness  of  the  Spirit,  which  descended  on  Him  at  His  bap- 
tism, and  remained  with  Him  during  all  the  days  of  His 
flesh,  and  wrought  by  Him  those  mighty  works,  and  in  whose 
strength  He  offered  Himself  on  the  cross,  that  He  was  able 
to  present  that  pure  offering  of  obedience  whereby  we  are 
sanctified.  How  much  more  need  we  that  ever-present,  ever- 
active  Spirit,  to  enable  us  to  bring  forth  every  fruit  of  holy 
obedience  unto  God,  of  self-sacrifice  and  self-destruction — ^we 
who  are  as  proud  as  Lucifer,  as  sinful  as  hell,  and  as  dead  and 
corrupt  as  the  grave  ;  who  might  "  say  unto  corruption,  Thou 
art  my  mother,  and  unto  the  worm.  Thou  art  my  brother  and 
sister ! "  All  this  our  present  life  in  the  Spirit  is  a  sacrifice,  a 
sacrifice  of  the  will,  a  willing  sacrifice,  a  living  sacrifice,  holy, 
acceptable  unto  God — that  is,  the  sacrifice  of  a  holy  life.  I 
say,  that  the  whole  labour  of  the  life  of  a  Christian,  the  whole 
actual  operation  of  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  in  this  our  fleshly 
sinful  tabernacle,  is  after  the  manner  of  a  sacrifice,  yet  a  will- 
ing sacrifice :  and  as  such  is  represented  in  the  mystery  of 
baptism,  which  is  the  "  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the 
flesh,  in  order  to  rise  with  Him,  through  the  faith  of  the 
operation  of  God,  who  raised  Him  from  the  dead :"  it  is  a 
purification  from  uncleanness ;  it  is  a  warfare  against  the 
powers  of  darkness :  in  short,  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit  doing 
over  again  in  all  the  election,  that  which  He  did  in  the 
Chosen  One,  from  the  day  of  His  baptism  until  the  day  of 
His  crucifixion.  This  is  most  important  to  be  borne  in  mind, 
in  order  to  plume  the  wing  of  your  higher  flight,  and  disen- 
tangle you  of  remaining  weights  for  a  more  strenuous  race, 
and  to  guard  you  from  that  delusive  and  slothful  ease  into 
which  our  converts  come  when  they  have  passed  the  novitiate 
of  their  conversion  and  spiritual  regeneration,  as  they  are 
pleased  to  term  it. 

Now,  besides  this,  there  is  another  distinct  operation  of 
Divine  grace  upon  the  soul  of  the  believer,  which  is  after  the 
nature  of  hope,  as  the  former  is  after  the  nature  of  experi- 
ence ;  the  one  being  the  prospect  of  an  assured  joy,  the  other 
the  presence  of  an  experienced  suffering ;  and  mutually  sus- 
taining one  another — the  joy  to  come  enabling  us  to  endure 
the  cross,  and  the  cross  that  is  present  brightening  the  desire 


ITS  FRUITS.  391 

and  hope  of  the  joy.  This,  which  proceedeth  side  by  side 
with  the  other,  and  is  the  light  by  which  the  shadow  of  the 
other  is  made  apparent ;  this,  which  groweth  and  dawneth  as 
the  darkness  of  the  other  disperseth  ;  this,  which  Hveth  as  the 
other  dieth — yea,  and  which  hath  power  to  kill  the  other,  as 
light  coming  from  a  distance  hath  power  to  destroy  the  dark- 
ness which  is  around  us — this  prospect  of  joy,  this  substance 
of  good  things  to  come,  is  wrought  in  us  by  the  application 
to  our  souls  of  that  other  portion  of  the  Saviour's  work  which 
beginneth  from  His  resurrection,  hath  since  been  proceeding, 
and  wWX  be  perfected  in  the  glory  that  is  to  come.  The  sa- 
crifice of  the  old  man  continueth  in  the  believer  until  death, 
and  then  we  lose  sight  of  it ;  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  Church 
continueth  through  the  present  age,  until  the  glorious  appear- 
ing of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour,  and  concludeth  also  in 
a  death — that  is,  the  death  of  her  body,  or  the  visible  Church, 
which  shall  then  have  contracted  upon  itself  all  the  sins  of 
outward  worldliness,  and  whose  death  shall  be  the  death  and 
destruction  of  all  worldly  and  wicked  power,  and  leave  the 
millennial  Church  free  from  its  thraldom  and  tyranny.  As 
the  body  of  Christ,  which  was  accounted  sin  for  us,  being 
slain,  did  carry  with  it  to  the  death  the  power  of  the  flesh 
over  the  Spirit,  and  all  ordinances  of  the  Church  which  had  a 
reference  thereto,  "  nailing  them  to  His  cross,"  and  delivering 
us  into  the  ability  of  triumphing  over  the  law  of  the  flesh, 
whose  potency  He  had  vanquished  by  the  Spirit  :  so  from  the 
time  that  the  body  of  the  true  Church — that  is,  the  visible 
part  of  the  true  Church — shall  have  been  sacrificed  and 
offered  up,  a  hecatomb  of  the  Spirit,  as  Christ  offered  up  the 
holocaust  of  the  flesh,  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  the  Church 
shall  step  out  from  under  the  yoke  of  worldly  power,  which  is 
ordained  over  us  of  God,  exactly  as  the  Levitical  dispensation 
of  priesthood,  the  commandments  which  stood  in  ordinances, 
was  ordained  over  the  former  Church,  a  most  needful  bondage, 
until  the  redemption  from  the  power  of  the  flesh  should  come : 
so  is  this  subjection  to  the  powers  of  the  present  age  a  most 
needful  bondage,  until  the  redemption  from  the  power  of  the 
world  shall  come,  that  is,  until  Satan  shall  be  cast  out,  and 
the  purchased  possession  redeemed.     Now,  the  work  which 


392  THE  INCARNATION : 

Christ  hath  been  carrying  on  from  the  day  of  His  resurrec- 
tion, until  He  shall  come  again  in  glory  and  majesty,  is 
the  nourishment  of  hope;  whose  joyful  and  victorious 
career  is  made  by  the  Spirit  to  kindle  in  us  a  fellowship  of 
His  resurrection,  and  of  His  present  spiritual  victories,  and 
of  his  future  personal  victories  ;  which  raiseth  and  exalteth 
us  above  all  trials,  and  enableth  us  to  undervalue  all  worldly 
joys,  pleasures,  and  preferments :  just  as  the  work  which  He 
accomplished,  from  the  day  of  eternity  when  He  purposed, 
or  from  the  day  of  the  fall  when  He  promised,  until  the  day 
of  His  death  when  He  accomplished.  His  suffering  and 
humiliation  for  our  sakes,  being  applied  to  us  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  doth  carry  us  to  a  depth  of  self-denial  and  suffering 
and  humiliation  and  mortification,  far  beneath  all  the  pe- 
nances and  stripes  and  pilgrimages  and  monastic  severities 
and  eremite  sufferings,  which  Satan  ever  invented  to  deck  the 
strumpet  mother  of  all  abominations.  And  as  the  sacrifice 
of  our  will  can  only  proceed  from  perceiving,  believing,  and 
meditating  the  utmost  rigour  of  the  law  accomplished  in  the 
first  part  of  our  Lord's  work,  so,  I  say,  that  the  strengthening 
of  the  Divine  will  and  power  in  us  can  only  proceed  from 
perceiving,  believing,  and  meditating  the  utmost  rewards  of 
innocency  and  obedience  to  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  accom- 
plished in  the  latter  part  of  His  work.  And  the  application 
of  these  two  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  doth  constitute  the  comple- 
tion of  grace  in  the  individual  believer.  In  this  manner  the 
Spirit  worketh,  by  applying  to  us  the  grace  which  was  re- 
vealed in  Christ  Jesus  ;  and  otherwise  than  by  directing  our 
souls  to  Jesus,  and  enabling  our  every  spiritual  sense  to  feed 
on  Jesus,  He  teacheth  not.  By  looking  steadfastly  upon  the 
face  of  His  flesh — the  humble  faith,  perfect  obedience,  and 
patient  suffering  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus — we  are  changed 
into  the  same  image  of  steadfast  faith,  quick  willingness,  and 
quiet  resignation.  By  looking  steadfastly  upon  the  face  of 
His  glory — His  triumphant  resurrection.  His  most  glorious 
ascension.  His  super-eminent  seat  of  power.  His  future  mani- 
festation in  powerful  majesty,  and  His  joyful  righteous  king- 
dom— we  are  transformed  into  the  same  image  of  power,  joy, 


ITS  FRUITS.  393 

strength,  and  victory  ;  from  humility  to  humility,  and  from 
glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Now,  as  to  the  manner  how  the  knowledge  and  faith,  the 
contemplation  and  deep  meditation  of  these  two  several  parts 
of  Christ's  work,  are  made  by  the  Holy  Ghost  effectual  to 
produce  in  the  believer  these  twofold  fruits — His  humiliation 
to  produce  humility,  and  His  exaltation  to  produce  exaltation 
— we  have  not  time  to  speak  particularly  :  let  it  suffice  to 
shew  that  it  is  a  great  distinction  of  Holy  Scripture,  which 
ought  to  be  preserved  in  all  the  offices  of  the  Church,  and 
especially  in  this  of  preaching,  which  I  now  fulfil.  In  the 
5th  of  the  Romans  Paul  saith,  "  For  if,  when  we  were  enemies, 
we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much 
more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life  :"  where 
His  death  is  made  the  cause  of  our  reconciliation,  His  life  of 
our  salvation.  And  what  this  salvation  is,  is  manifest  from 
the  preceding  verses,  where  the  same  truth  is  thus  stated  : 
"  But  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we 
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us  :  much  more,  then,  being 
now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath 
through  him."  This  salvation  is,  therefore,  salvation  from  the 
wrath  to  come ;  which  the  apostle  deriveth  not  from  the 
death,  but  from  the  life  of  Christ  :  according  to  that  word, 
"  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."  But  the  apostle,  not 
content  with  ensuring  the  believer  of  his  salvation  from  the 
wrath  which  is  to  be  revealed  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  against 
all  unrighteousness  of  men,  advanceth  unto  a  higher  strain, 
and  saith,  "  And  not  only  so,  but  we  also  joy  in  God  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  received  the  atone- 
ment." In  like  manner,  in  the  8th  of  the  Romans,  it  is  said, 
of  those  who  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  "We  groan 
within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  that  is,  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  body.  For  we  are  saved  by  hope  :  but  hope  that 
is  seen,  is  not  hope  :  for  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  yet 
hope  for.-*  But  if  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then  do  we 
with  patience  wait  for  it."  Whence  we  conclude  that  the 
work  of  the  Spirit,  in  applying  the  redemption  purchased  by 
Christ,  is  twofold; — one,  to  crucify  us  with  Him;  to  enable 


394  THE  INCARNATION: 

us  to  groan  within  ourselves  under  the  burden  of  sin,  and  yet 
to  prevail  against  it  by  the  participation  of  the  Divine  nature 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  we  enjoy.  This  is  the  service  of 
God,  the  very  good  service,  in  which  He  delighteth,  against 
all  His  and  our  enemies.  And  the  other  is,  to  fix  and  fasten 
the  eye  of  our  presently  crucified  body  full  upon  the  glory  of 
our  Lord  into  which  He  hath  entered  ;  and  fill  us  with  hope, 
yea,  and  gladness,  at  the  mighty  power  of  His  resurrection, 
which  is  begun  to  work  in  us,  and  shall  not  finish  until  it  hath 
brought  us  through  the  waters,  into  the  blessedness  and  honour 
which  He  hath  received  to  share  with  us  in  that  blessed  day 
of  His  and  our  manifestation,  for  which  all  creatures  travail 
and  are  in  bondage  even  until  now.  Thus  Paul  saith  of  him- 
self, "Always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  might  be  made  mani- 
fest in  our  body."  And  again,  he  saith  of  those  who  are 
quickened  from  their  death  in  trespasses  and  sins,  that  *'  they 
were  raised  up  together,  and  made  to  sit  together  with  Christ 
in  the  heavenly  places."  And  again  he  saith,  "  If  ye  then  be 
risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are  above,  where 
Christ  sitteth,  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  Set  your  afiections 
on  things  above,  and  not  on  things  on  the  earth.  For  ye  are 
dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God ;  when  Christ, 
who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with 
him  in  glory."  Now,  I  ask  in  what  sense  we  can  be  said  to 
be  risen  with  Christ,  otherwise  than  in  that  life  of  hope, 
desire,  and  longing  expectation,  which  we  have  fixed  upon 
His  present  exaltation  as  the  assurance  of  our  future  ex- 
altation, and  of  His  glorious  manifestation  on  the  day  of 
our  entrance  into  glory } — in  all  which  consisteth  the  power 
of  His  resurrection  working  in  us  those  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  which  carry  the  soul  forward  and  above  the  present 
stern  strife  and  weary  warfare,  and  enhearten  her  for  the 
patience  and  perseverance  of  the  contest.  And  I  say  that 
this  is  as  essential  a  part  of  the  Spirit's  operation  as  that 
which  sets  us  on  edge  for  the  battle,  and  arms  us  for  the  con- 
flict. Nay,  I  will  say  that  our  hands  will  soon  hang  down, 
and  our  knees  weary,  unless  we  have  our  eyes  continually  to- 
wards the  banner  of  the  risen  glory,  which  waveth  in  the  van- 


ITS  FRUITS.  395 

guard  of  the  battle.  The  battle  is  from  the  cross,  but  the 
victory  is  from  the  resurrection.  I  confess,  while  so  many- 
are  preaching  Jesus  and  the  cross,  I  am  strongly  disposed  to 
take  up  for  my  burden  Christ  and  the  resurrection,  the  Lord 
and  His  glorious  advent.  But  I  may  not  imitate  their  ex- 
ample, in  separating  and  dividing  the  work  of  Christ,  which, 
as  I  observed,  is  all  necessary  to  the  manifestation  of  grace ; 
nor  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  also  complete  in  the 
application  to  our  souls  of  the  completed  work  of  Christ, 
both  of  His  humiliation  and  His  exaltation.  But  this  I  make 
free  to  declare,  that  there  is  no  preaching  of  the  resurrection 
of  Christ ;  and  from  thence  I  perceive  it  cometh  that  there  is 
no  vicfour  in  the  soldiers  of  Christ,  who  are  like  soldiers  in  the 
hospital,  rather  than  soldiers  in  the  field  ;  men  at  ease,  not 
men  at  arms. 

Such,  dearly  beloved  brethren,  is  a  poor,  a  very  poor,  yet 
according  to  my  gift  a  faithful,  representation  of  the  infinitely 
pregnant  mystery  which  has  been  disclosing  since  the  fall  of 
man,  and  shall  to  eternity  disclose,  the  most  glorious  of  all 
the  attributes  and  works  of  God.  As  concerneth  the  Father, 
the  righteous,  just,  and  holy  Father,  how  great  grace  doth  it 
bespeak  in  His  bosom,  to  pity  rebels,  to  forgive  the  resistance 
of  His  own  creatures,  to  give  His  Son,  His  only-begotten  and 
well-beloved  Son,  for  the  sake  of  the  guilty !  Of  which  most 
gracious  act  to  comprehend  the  greatness  passeth  all  finite 
minds,  and  to  feel  the  kindred  emotion  of  it  is  reserved  for  the 
pure  and  more  perfect  condition  of  the  life  to  come,  when  we 
shall  know  as  we  are  known,  and  be  perfected  in  love.  But, 
with  our  present  blemished  and  blotted  minds,  we  have  no 
lively  sense  of  the  holiness  which  had  been  wounded,  of  the 
justice  which  called  for  satisfaction,  of  the  entire  and  all-per- 
vading horror  wherewith  the  Divine  nature  abhorreth  sin. 
What  grace  in  the  Father,  to  meditate,  to  originate,  and  to 
perfect  the  scheme  of  salvation  by  His  Son  !  Then  what 
grace  in  the  almighty  and  all-creating  Son,  the  co-eternal,  co- 
essential  Word,  to  take  the  form  of  accursed,  miserable, 
mortal  man,  and  for  ever  to  wed  human  nature  to  the  fellow- 
ship of  the  Divine;  to  empty  Himself  of  His  divinity,  and  in 
every  act  to  be  very  man,  very  sinful  man,  though  He  had 


396  THE  INCARNATION: 

done  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth ;  that  He 
might  make  reconciliation  for  those  wretched,  abject  crea- 
tures, who  knew  not  of  His  infinite  love,  deserved  it  not, 
cared  not  for  it,  trampled  it  under  foot,  and  crucified  the 
Lord  of  glory !  What  grace  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  bring  this 
perfect  life,  this  all-meritorious  death  of  the  Saviour,  into 
contact  with  our  lustful,  ungodly,  devilish  nature ;  to  quicken 
life  in  the  stony  heart,  and  nurse  it  in  the  corrupt  flesh  of 
man ;  to  apply,  point  by  point,  the  power  of  grace  to  the 
power  of  nature ;  to  bring  the  strength  and  beauty  of  Christ 
into  contact  with  the  strength  and  deformity  of  Satan ;  thus 
to  withstand,  thus  to  struggle  with,  and  thus  to  vanquish, 
thus  to  deliver,  thus  to  beautify,  and  thus  to  glorify  every 
sinner  for  whom  Christ  died,  and  whom  the  Father  had 
given  unto  Christ !  What  grace  !  oh,  what  riches  of  grace ! 
dear  brethren,  are  not  exhibited  to  us  in  this  work  of  redemp- 
tion, in  the  word  of  this  gospel  which  is  preached  unto  you  ! 
This  is  what  the  apostle  blessed  the  Ephesian  Church  withal; 
this  is  what  I  bless  you  withal  every  Sabbath  day.  This  is 
what  you  have  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  This  is  your  second 
nature :  I  should  say,  this  is  your  redemption  from  nature. 
This  is  your  second  gift  from  God :  the  endowment  and 
the  principle  of  a  better  being  than  Adam  ever  possessed  ; 
the  beginning  and  the  accomplishment  of  a  better  nature 
than  that  of  angels  or  archangels  ;  the  endowment  of  a  more 
glorious  condition  than  that  possessed  by  any  other  creature 
of  God.  I  hardly  know  in  what  language  to  speak  of  the 
exaltation  to  which  this  gift  lifteth  the  sons  of  men  aloft, 
above  principalities  and  powers,  and  the  various  orders  of  the 
heavenly  host ;  for  we  are  fellow-heirs  with  Christ,  partakers 
of  His  throne,  and  co-heirs  of  His  kingdom.  I  cannot  ex- 
press myself;  I  lose  myself  in  the  sublimity  and  infinitude  of 
the  revelations  of  God.  Yet  this,  which  the  heart  cannot  con- 
ceive, and  the  tongue  of  man  cannot  utter,  nor  the  compre- 
hension of  man  measure  in  any  one  of.  its  chambers,  is  that 
which  I  this  day  offer  unto  you,  the  Church  of  Christ,  the 
saints  of  God,  which  are  of  this  congregation,  the  faithful  in 
Christ  Jesus.  I  offer  it  without  price  :  otherwise  grace  were 
not  free.     I  offer  it  without  work  :  otherwise  grace  were  no 


ITS  FRUITS.  397 

more  grace.  I  present  it  as  God's  gift  unto  His  elect  chil- 
dren, which  they  will  lay  up  in  their  hearts.  I  present  it 
unto  all ;  and  woe  be  to  him  who  heapeth  infinite  wrath 
upon  himself  by  rejecting  this  infinite  gift  of  God  by  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord  ! 

I  exhort  you,  therefore,  dear  brethren,  in  order  that  you 
may  be  partakers  of  the  fulness  of  this  grace  and  power,  to 
look  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  your  faith,  and 
to  receive  Him  as  He  is  freely  offered  unto  you  of  your 
heavenly  Father.  Doubt  not  that  God,  who  hath  given  you 
Christ  Jesus,  will  with  Him  freely  give  you  all  things.  All 
things  necessary  to  life  and  godliness  are  included  in  this  gift 
of  Christ.  That  work  of  the  Divine  grace  which  was  mani- 
fested in  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  reacheth  onward  to  the 
redemption  of  all  the  elect,  and  shall  be  consummated  in 
their  glory  and  honour,  and  the  redemption  of  the  purchased 
possession,  with  all  the  other  mysteries  of  power  which  shall 
be  manifested  in  the  day  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  There- 
fore ye,  who  are  the  saints  of  God  and  faithful  in  Christ 
Jesus,  should  assure  your  hearts  before  Him,  and  not  be 
afraid  with  any  amazement.  We  should  rest  in  our  love,  and 
rejoice  in  our  hope ;  we  should  behold  the  magnitude,  and 
be  filled  with  the  treasures  of  His  grace.  It  is  His  own  work 
in  us,  and  He  will  perfect  it  until  the  day  of  redemption. 
His  grace  will  be  sufficient  for  us,  and  His  strength  will  be 
perfected  in  our  weakness.  Ye  see,  dear  brethren,  what 
plenty,  what  all-sufficiency,  you  have  in  Christ ;  and  out  of 
Him  what  poverty  and  misery.  Betake  yourselves  to  Him 
with  all  confidence;  flee  unto  Him  as  the  ark  of  salvation; 
and  put  your  trust  under  the  shadow  of  His  wings  until  the 
evil  days  be  over-past.  Thus  do,  and  you  shall  find  rest  for 
yourselves  :  thus  do  not,  and  you  shall  be  like  a  wave  of  the 
sea,  driven  of  the  winds  and  tossed.  Hear  ye  the  word  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  :  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are  weary  and 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon 
you  and  learn  of  me  ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  and 
ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 


VI. 

CONCLUSIONS  CONCERNING  THE  SUBSISTENCE  OF  GOD,  AND 
THE  SUBSISTENCE  OF  THE  CREATURE,  DERIVED  FROM 
REFLECTING   UPON    THE   INCARNATION. 

John  i.  i8. 

No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  only-begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him. 

'\X7'HILE  meditating  the  above  sermons  on  the  incarna- 
tion, various  thoughts  connected  with  this  great  subject 
have  stirred  my  mind,  touching  its  relations  unto  other  great 
subjects ;  and  I  have  been  led  to  perceive  distinctly,  how  the 
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  is  the  ground  and  basis  of  all 
real  'knowledge  with  respect  to  the  Godhead,  is  the  ground 
and  basis  of  all  worship  of  the  Godhead  by  the  creature,  and 
of  the  creature's  own  eternal  being  and  blessedness.  I  per- 
ceive, moreover,  through  the  light  cast  upon  these  subjects 
by  the  incarnation,  how  a  creation  out  of  God,  and  yet  wor- 
shipping God,  is  not  possible  without  the  knowledge  of  God 
in  three  persons  subsisting,  which,  if  it  can  be  speculatively 
attained  by  the  reason,  is  a  truth  realised  only  by  the  incar- 
nation. Now,  it  is  my  desire  to  point  out  some  of  these 
high  relations  of  the  subject,  which  God  hath  enabled  me  to 
perceive ;  in  doing  which,  the  great  difficulty  is  to  observe 
order  and  method, — for  the  thoughts  are  high,  and  the  range 
of  them  is  very  far.  Yet,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  shall  endea- 
vour to  comprehend  them  under  these  three  heads  : — 

First,  The  coming  of  the  Godhead  into  action  to  create, 
and  to  manifest  itself  unto  the  creatures  whom  it  hath  made, 
and  to  receive  their  worship  and  homage.  This  will  open 
insight  into  the  manner  of  the  Divine  existence  in  three  per- 
sonalities. 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  399 

Secondly,  Wc  would  endeavour  to  shew  how  the  creature 
shall  subsist  in  an  infallible  and  indestructible  state,  distinct 
from  the  Godhead,  with,  and  by  means  of  Christ  a  form  of 
existence  between  the  two,  which  is  of  both,  and,  being  of 
both,  distinct  from  each.  This  will  open  insight  into  the 
three  great  distinctions,  between  the  incomprehensible  God- 
head, the  Christhead,  and  the  infallible  creature,  inhabited 
by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  which  three  things  may  never  be  mingled 
together,  so  as  to  be  confused  with  one  another. 

Thirdly,  We  shall  endeavour  to  open  the  connexions  and 
communions,  not  the  less  subsisting  amongst  these  three 
existences,  the  incomprehensible  Godhead,  the  Godmanhood, 
and  the  Spirit-inhabited  creature,  in  such  wise  as  secureth 
worship  unto  the  first,  lordship  unto  the  second,  and  infalli- 
bility unto  the  third. 

And  if  we  shall  be  able  to  open  these  three  great  heads  of 
doctrine,  we  shall  have  comprehended  and  resolved  the  great 
problem  of  creation,  and  seen  clean  through  unto  the  ultimate 
end  of  God,  which  is  to  manifest  and  communicate  Himself 
unto  the  creatures ;  for  I  consider  creation  to  be  no  more  than 
the  indelible,  indestructible  expression  of  that  truth,  God  of 
one  substance  in  three  persons  subsisting. 

I.  First,  then,  in  the  work  of  the  creation  we  have  maintained 
these  heads  of  doctrine  concerning  the  Trinity  : — i.  That 
the  infinite  God,  who  is  also  invisible  and  incomprehensible, 
cannot  communicate  Himself,  or  the  knowledge  of  Himself, 
unto  His  creatures,  without  assuming  to  Himself  a  finite  form. 
In  order  to  be  visible  and  comprehensible  ;  nay,  we  may  go 
a  step  higher,  and  say,  that  in  order  to  fashion  finite  crea- 
tures, in  order  to  do  a  finite  action,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
actor  should  assume  a  finite  form.  But,  without  doing  more 
than  to  mention  this  great  principle  of  Divine  operations, 
we  observe,  that  if  the  end  of  God  in  creation  be,  to  manifest 
Himself  unto  the  creatures,  which  is  indeed  the  only  end  that 
He  hath  declared ;  and  if  His  method  of  doing  this  be  by 
bringing  in  His  own  Son,  and  setting  Him  up  for  ever,  in  the 
form  of  the  Lamb  slain  and  risen  from  the  dead,  or  in  the 
form  of  risen  God-man,  and  in  that  form  to  shew  Himself  for 


400  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

ever  and  ever  unto  the  creatures  which  He  proposed  to  create  ; 
then  is  it  never  to  be  doubted,  that  He  who  worketh  all 
things  to  the  praise  of  His  own  glory,  and  who  leaveth  no 
loose  or  open  parts  in  His  purpose,  but  maketh  it  to  be  alto- 
gether harmonious,  and  consenting  unto  the  great  end,  would 
from  the  beginning  of  creation  bring  Himself  into  action  under 
that  form,  which  He  was  afterwards  to  assume  :  that  is  to  say, 
everything  would  have  an  eye  and  aim  to  the  risen  God-man, 
everything  would  tell  and  foretell  of  Him,  everything  would 
have  its  origin  in  that  idea  or  purpose,  and  have  the  definition 
of  its  being  thereby  determined.  And  this  is  what  I  under- 
stand, by  all  things  being  made  for  Christ,  as  well  as  by 
Christ,  The  Christ  form  of  being,  God  and  man  in  one  per- 
son, was  only  an  idea  and  a  purpose  until  the  incarnation, 
when  it  became  a  fact.  The  person  of  the  eternal  Son,  I 
mean,  did  not  become  the  Christ  in  very  deed,  until  He  took 
human  substance  of  the  virgin.  Therefore,  the  only  meaning 
that  can  be  assigned  to  such  expressions  as  that  all  things 
were  made  by  Him  and  for  Him  is,  that  the  person  of  the 
Son — not  in  His  absolute  infinity,  which  I  have  said  I  even 
believe  to  be  impossible,  but  in  the  finite  creature  form  which 
He  was  in  the  fulness  of  time  to  assume  and  to  retain  for 
ever  and  ever — did  create  all  things  visible  and  invisible, 
whether  they  be  thrones,  or  principalities,  or  dominions,  or 
powers  ;  wherefore,  also,  He  is  called  first-begotten  from  the 
dead,  first-born  of  every  creature.  This,  then,  is  the  only 
ground  of  revelation  anterior  to  Christ,  that  God  might  tes- 
tify unto  Him  that  is  to  come  ;  and  creation  till  He  come,  is 
but  that  same  testimony,  from  the  strongest  archangel  down 
to  the  worm  that  crawleth  on  the  ground.  I  believe  there  is 
no  sportiveness,  playfulness,  idleness,  extravagance,  or  waste 
of  creation  power,  but  one  concatenated  systematic  testimony 
unto  the  Christ ;  into  whom,  as  all  the  disjected  members  are 
to  be  gathered  up  again  into  the  head,  so  believe  I,  that  in  their 
present  disjected  state,  the  only  end  and  purpose  of  their  being 
is,  to  testify  to  Him  of  whom  man  is  the  only  image,  and  Adam 
before  his  fall  the  only  perfect  type.  Now,  the  counterpart 
of  revelation  is  faith ;  and  if  the  end  of  creation  is  to  reveal 
Christ,  then  the  object  of  all  faith  must  be  Christ.     And  all 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  \o\ 

knowledge  in  the  creature  subsisting,  whether  of  itself,  or  of 
other  creatures,  or  of  God,  is  no  true  knowledge,  until  it  hath 
turned  to  a  testimony,  is  cither  incomplete  or  is  false,  until  it 
hath  revealed  something  concerning  Christ,  who  is  the  end  of 
all  created  things ;  and  therefore  faith  comes  in  where  know- 
ledge endeth  ;  or,  I  should  say,  knowledge  is  but  as  the  needle 
that  pointeth  unto  Christ,  in  whom  I  must  believe :  and  the 
rivers  of  knowledge  pour  themselves  into  the  ocean  of  faith  ; 
for  the  end  of  knowledge  is  not  itself,  but  something  which  is 
to  be.  And  the  word,  being  the  communication  of  know- 
ledge, doth,  therefore,  no  more  than  set  out  Christ  that  I  may 
believe  upon  Him ;  and  the  preaching  of  the  Word  is  the  tes- 
timony of  Jesus.  But  we  have  not  yet  arrived  at  the  root  of 
the  matter,  which  is  deeper  still. 

The  end  of  all  things  created  ,by  the  Godhead  being,  as 
hath  been  said,  the  bringing  in  of  the  Christ,  and  that  not  at 
the  beginning,  but  onward  a  good  way  in  the  procession  of 
the  purpose,  the  preceding  period  must  necessarily  be  the 
season  of  faith,  during  which  the  creatures  can  live  only  by 
faith.  For  the  thing  visible  is  not  the  real  thing  that  is  to  be 
for  ever  ;  but  is  to  be  changed  into  its  eternal  form,  whenever 
the  Christ  in  His  eternal  form  shall  be  revealed.  Seeing, 
then,  that  faith  is  the  condition  of  all  the  creatures  until 
Christ  come,  they  must  be  constituted  fit  subjects  for  faith  : 
they  must  be  constituted,  also,  fit  subjects  of  hope,  and  alto- 
gether imperfect  without  hope :  and  these  two  principles  of 
faith  and  hope  must  be  wrought  into  the  very  vitals  of  their 
constitution.  Now  this  is  truly  the  condition  of  man  ;  who  is 
born  to  believe,  having  no  knowledge  until  he  receive  it  from 
another ;  and  is  born  to  hope,  having  nothing  in  possession 
to  begin  with,  but  nakedness,  helplessness,  hunger,  and  want 
of  every  kind.  To  a  creature  thus  constituted,  faith  and  hope 
become  the  elements  of  his  being ;  and  therefore,  in  his  very 
nature,  man  proveth  himself  a  witness  for  something  that  is 
to  come.  And  such  a  creature  is  proper  to  become  the  sub- 
ject of  a  divine  revelation;  and  through  such  creatures  that 
divine  revelation  must  be  communicated  to  other  creatures, 
who  are  not  in  like  manner  constituted ;  even  as  the  apostle 
expressly  declareth,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  That  it 
VOL.  V.  2  C 


402  THE  INCARNATION: 

is  by  the  Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  is  made  known 
unto  the  heavenly  hosts:  and  through  the  intelligence  and 
power  which  man  possesseth  over  the  lower  creatures,  God 
expecteth  of  His  piety,  and  of  His  diligence,  that  He  would 
make  them  speak  the  praises  of  God  their  Creator,  which  is 
Christ,  and  make  them  prophesy  concerning  Him  which  is  to 
come :  so  that,  as  God  destined  man  to  be  the  form  which 
He  should  assume.  He  hath  made  man  also  to  be  the  great 
witness  unto  His  coming  in  that  form. 

If  all  things  then  were  created  by  the  Son,  in  the  assumed 
form  of  the  Christ,  or  the  risen  God-man,  then  all  things 
spoken  by  God  unto  man  must  be  spoken  by  the  Son  in  that 
same  character.  But  it  may  be  asked  here,  What  need  to  speak 
at  all  ?  I  answer.  Because  when  the  creature  had  fallen  into 
sin  and  death,  it  necessarily  became  overspread  with  dark- 
ness, and  ignorance,  and  error.  And  this  was  one  reason 
of  the  fall,  even  to  negative  that  light  of  revelation  which 
the  creature  possessed  in  itself;  to  shew  that  the  creature 
was  not  the  true  light,  but  only  a  witness  of  the  true  light ; 
and  that  the  witness  might  not  be  mistaken  for  the  person 
witnessed  of,  it  came  to  pass  that  darkness  was  permitted  to 
cover  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people.  Yet,  under 
this  the  cloud  of  darkness,  the  mystery  lay  shrouded  ;  but  so 
shrouded  as  that  the  creature,  in  himself,  should  not  be  able 
to  discover  it.  And  thus,  during  the  fall-season  of  the  crea- 
ture, it  is  connected  with  the  Creator  by  its  very  imperfect- 
ness  ;  having  in  itself  the  ground  of  the  truth  of  the  promise 
of  God,  but  yet,  not  being  able  of  itself  to  read  the  lesson 
thereof ;  having  a  will,  but  in  bondage  ;  having  an  under- 
standing, but  in  darkness  ;  having  a  body,  but  under  the  law 
of  sin  and  death ;  having  a  world  for  a  possession,  but  a 
world  ever  rising  in  arms  against  its  Master ;  having  a  being 
craving  for  faith,  but  ever  falling  into  superstition ;  having  a 
being  formed  for  hope,  but  ever  falling  into  delusion.  A 
miserable  estate  indeed,  had  it  been  cut  off  and  separated 
from  Divine  teaching !  but,  being  connected  with  Divine 
teaching,  the  only  state  of  being  in  which  it  was  good  for  the 
creature  to  be  during  the  preparatory  and  preliminary  season 
before  the  coming  of  Christ.     For,  by  these  very  defects,  by 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  403 

these  very  unsatisfied  cravings,  it  was  taught  its  need  of  a 
higher  Teacher ;  which  lesson,  without  such  imperfections, 
the  creature  could  never  have  learned.  And  thus  the  fall 
becomes  the  ground  of  a  revelation,  such  as  we  now  possess  ; 
that  is,  a  revelation  of  words  superinduced  upon  the  marred 
revelation  of  creation.  The  fall  made  the  knot  which  no 
fallen  being  could  loose  ;  which  every  one,  by  his  own  nature, 
should  be  craving  to  have  loosed ;  but  could  not  otherwise 
have  loosed,  than  from  some  one  higher  than  himself.  The 
fall  made  the  riddle,  which  no  fallen  intellect  could  resolve, 
and  which  might  create  a  craving  for  superhuman  intelli- 
gence ;  and  thus  it  is,  that  the  fallen  world,  without  a  revela- 
tion, were  indeed  a  solecism  in  the  idea :  but  a  fallen  world 
with  a  revelation  is  a  better  state  of  the  creation  than  its  first 
or  unfallen  estate,  because  in  this  there  existed  nothing  to  dis- 
tinguish it  from  God,  and  to  teach  it  that  it  was  not  God 
in  itself;  no  incompleteness,  no  mystery,  no  suffering,  no 
evil,  no  apparent  contradiction  to  be  reconciled.  But  in  the 
other  state,  the  creature  by  its  very  want,  from  clothes  of 
skin  to  clothing  of  righteousness,  from  succession  of  seasons 
to  give  him  bread  unto  the  preparation  of  the  times  and 
seasons  for  giving  him  bread  from  heaven,  all  from  new-born 
babyhood  unto  the  birth  of  the  resurrection  morn,  is  man  in 
the  fallen  state  of  his  being  dependent  upon  the  word  of  the 
revelation  of  God,  Oh,  what  a  mystery  of  goodness,  as  well 
as  of  wisdom,  there  is  to  be  seen  in  the  fall  of  man,  which 
made  way  for  the  revelation  of  word  and  of  ordinance,  and 
enabled  a  Church  to  be  preserved  upon  the  earth,  exclusive 
of  none  which  should  maintain  the  testimony,  until  He  that 
is  to  come  should  come  ! 

Thus  was  the  creature  linked  to  the  Creator,  by  the  very 
act  of  its  falling  away  from  Him,  and  hung  in  total  depend- 
ence upon  His  gracious  word,  by  the  very  act  of  disobeying 
His  word  :  just  as  the  infant,  which  with  anguish  is  rent  from 
its  parent,  becomes,  in  that  very  act  of  its  birth,  the  object  of 
its  parent's  tenderest  care.  It  was  no  longer  a  creation  out 
of  God,  but  a  creation  that  had  been  out  of  Him,  brought 
into  Him,  and  standing  in  Him  by  His  gracious  and  faithful 
word.     And  not  only  did  the  fall  of  the  creature  thus  make 


404  THE  INCARNATION: 

way  for  the  revelation  of  the  grace  of  God,  but  it  did  also,  in 
a  manner,  render  that  revelation  absolutely  necessary,  in 
order  to  maintain  the  completeness  and  accomplish  the  ends 
of  the  Divine  purpose.  Because  now  the  creation  being 
made  subject  unto  vanity,  and  possessed  with  the  spirit  of 
a  lie,  wanting  its  high  Prophet  to  interpret  its  ever  misinter- 
preted mystery ;  man  himself  having  become  subject  to  the 
deceiver,  and  being  no  more  able  to  understand  or  prophesy 
the  truth  ;  either  the  creation  must  fail  from  its  high  design 
of  being  and  speaking  and  acting  for  Christ,  or  God  himself 
must  interfere  with  a  Divine  commentary  and  interpretation 
thereof.  And  forasmuch  as  we  cannot  believe  that  God  is 
ever  to  be  thwarted,  or  the  testimony  of  Christ  ever  defeated, 
it  doth  necessarily  remain,  that  a  revelation  shall  be  superin- 
duced upon  a  fall ;  and  that  God  shall  first  appear  a  Prophet, 
to  gainsay  the  gainsayers,  and  to  deliver  truth  from  the  jaws 
of  the  lion,  before  He  becometh  a  High  Priest  to  purify  and 
sanctify  the  whole  lump,  and  a  King  of  kings  to  rule  over 
it  in  righteousness.  In  which  character  of  the  Prophet  He 
shall  separate  the  truth  from  the  lie,  and  preserve  the  testi- 
mony of  the  truth  against  the  many  witnesses  of  the  lie. 

2.  And,  secondly,  we  have  maintained  that  this  word  of  re- 
velation is  to  'be  made  consistently  with  the  acting  of  God  in 
a  Trinity  of  Persons.  All  things  being  made  for  the  Christ, 
and  by  the  Christ,  all  things  must  be  spoken  for  Him  and  by 
Him.  Wherefore  also  He  hath  His  name  of  the  Word,  which 
was  with  God  in  the  beginning,  and  which  was  God ;  to  sig- 
nify that  His  character  of  Revealer  by  word  is  as  indefeasible 
a  prerogative  of  His  Person  in  the  blessed  Trinity,  as  is  His 
character  of  Creator  of  all  things,  or  His  character  of  the 
Lamb  slain  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  or  His  char- 
acter of  only-begotten  and  first-begotten  from  the  dead.  It 
proves,  moreover,  that  a  revelation  by  word  is  older  than  the 
fountain-head  of  time,  even  old  as  the  purpose  of  the  Ancient 
of  days.  And  it  moreover  proveth,  that  the  covenant  be- 
tween the  Father  and  the  Son,  before  the  world  was,  is  a 
true  idea  ;  and  that  all  word  external,  and  uttered,  is  but  the 
extension  of  that  deed  which  was  done  and  sealed  with  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb  before  the  world  was.     Wherefore,  also, 


GOD  AND  THE  CREA  TURE.  405 

the  Holy  Scriptures  are  called  the  two  Testaments  or  Cove- 
nants. If  Christ,  then,  be  the  Word  of  God,  the  Light  that 
lighteth  every  man  who  by  God  is  sent  into  the  world,  the  true 
and  faithful  Witness,  who,  having  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  is  the  only  one  able  to  reveal  Him,^  because  He  only 
hath  seen  Him,  He  only  hath  known  Him  ;  then  through  Him 
must  this  work  proceed,  and  He  must  speak  it  in  that  form  of 
the  creature  in  which  He  is  for  ever  to  reveal  the  Godhead,  that 
is,  in  the  form  of  risen  God-man.  So  that  when  He  says, "  Let 
us  make  man  in  our  own  image,"  it  is  not  the  image  of  the  in- 
finite Godhead,  but  the  image  of  that  risen  God-manhood  in 
which  the  Godhead  is  to  manifest  itself.  The  word  is  not  uttered 
by  the  invisible  Father,  who  speaketh  nothing  but  by  the  Son ; 
nor  is  it  spoken  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  speaketh  nothing 
which  He  hath  not  first  heard  of  the  Son  ;  but  it  is  spoken 
by  the  Son,  who  speakethnothing  of  Himself,  but  what  He 
heareth  from  the  Father.  Neither  by  the  Son  is  it  spoken  in 
His  infinite  Godhead,  but  in  His  predestinated  creature  form ; 
or,  as  we  would  say,  in  character,  and  in  keeping  with  that 
manifestation  of  God  which  is  to  be  for  ever,  are  all  mani-, 
festations  of  God  which  have  been  from  the  beginning,  to  the 
end  that  Christ's  working  in  the  whole,  and  the  working  of 
the  whole  for  Christ,  may  be  made  manifest. 

This  matter  will  bear  yet  a  little  more  consideration,  for 
it  is  a  deep  and  a  most  important  matter.  Christ  did  not 
assume  the  form  of  risen  God-manhood,  without  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  who  created  His  body,  who  informed  it  against  the 
fallen  tendencies  of  the  creature,  who  raised  it  from  the  grave, 
and  doth  now  inform  all  its  members,  proceeding  from  the 
Head,  and  by  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  actings 
of  Christ,  is  the  presence  of  the  Father  manifested.  The  Son, 
in  His  proper  divinity,  is  infinite,  as  the  Father  is  infinite,  and 
as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  infinite ;  and  yet  these  are  not  three 
infinites,  but  one  infinite.  Now,  before  the  infinite  Godhead 
in  the  Son  could  act  in  the  finite  form,  whether  before  taking 
that  form  or  after.  He  must  act  not  of  Himself  only,  but  with 
the  consent  and  concurrence  of  the  other  persons  of  the 
Trinity.  And  this  is  not  a  small  matter,  but  is  in  fact  that 
which  determineth  all  the  rest.     This  is  the  fountain  head  of 


4o6  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

Divine  goodness,  that  the  Godhead  should  once  act  in  a 
finite  form,  to  the  accomplishment  of  a  finite  end  :  and  this 
involveth  in  it  all  which  follows  of  creation,  of  the  fall,  of 
revelation,  of  redemption,  of  resurrection,  and  eternal  glory : 
it  is  all  shut  up  in  that  one  word,  that  it  is  the  good  pleasure 
of  the  infinite  Godhead  to  do  finite  things.  The  choice  of 
the  form  in  which  it  was  to  be  done,  whether  of  angel,  or  of 
archangel,  or  of  man,  are  inferior  questions  to  this,  that  it 
should  be  done  at  all.  Now,  how  is  this  assent  and  con- 
currence of  the  three  persons  of  the  blessed  Trinity  secured, 
to  this  great  undertaking  of  Godhead  .'*  Here  comes  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  orthodox  fathers  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  the  vinailnm  Trinitatis,  the  circle  of  communication  be- 
tween the  Father  and  the  Son,  through  whom  the  will  of  the 
Father  expresseth  itself  to  the  Son,  and  the  obedience  of  the 
Son  expresseth  itself  back  again  to  the  Father.  The  action 
to  be  done  is,  that,  in  the  person  of  the  Son,  Deity  should  go 
forth  in  finite  works  of  creation.  The  will  of  the  Father  is 
communicated  to  the  Son,  and  the  obedience  of  the  Son 
returned,  through  the  Holy  Ghost :  and  thus,  as  it  is  in  the 
origination,  so  it  is  in  the  details  of  the  accomplishment.  In 
everything  done  in  creation,  in  everything  spoken  in  revela- 
tion, in  everything  acted  in  the  incarnation,  in  everything 
suffered  in  the  Church,  and  in  everything  to  be  executed  in 
the  kingdom ;  Christ  is  the  doer,  the  Father  is  the  wilier,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  the  suggester  of  the  will.  And  thus  the 
Divinity  follows  out  still  its  eternal  and  necessary  law  of  being 
in  the  secret  recesses  of  its  own  harmonious  purpose,  with 
which  no  creature  intermeddleth,  and  of  which  no  creature  is 
competent  to  discourse,  further  than  to  say,  Thus  it  is,  because 
it  is  revealed  that  there  is  a  trinity  of  persons  in  the  Godhead. 
And  thus  the  Son,  in  coming  into  action  in  the  finite  form, 
doth  already  possess  the  consenting  goodness,  the  harmonious 
mind  of  the  three  infinite  personalities  of  the  Godhead.  And 
thus  He  is  not  a  manifestation  of  the  Son,  in  action  upon  finite 
things,  but  He  is  a  manifestation  of  the  Godhead,  acting  by 
the  Son,  in  finite  things  ;  and  this  He  is,  from  the  first  begin- 
ning to  create,  until  eternal  and  eternal  ages,  during  which 
He  shall  in  finite  form  reveal  the  Godhead  unto  every  crea- 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  407 

ture.  And  observe  further,  that  thus  He  can  refer  back  to 
the  Godhead,  as  greater  than  He,  because  He  can  only  be 
known  by  limitations  :  and  yet  He  can  say,  that  in  Him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead.  And  forasmuch  as 
the  Son  thus  taketh  in  hand  the  manifestation  to  rule  over 
it,  the  Father  must  keep  in  hand  the  unmanifested  of  the 
unmanifestable  Godhead,  to  represent  it,  and  to  call  it  by 
His  name.  Likewise,  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  thus  bringeth 
unto  Christ's  ear  the  voice  of  the  Father,  doth  receive  from 
Christ  the  signification  of  the  voice  of  His  obedience,  and 
doth  carry  into  effect  the  limited  form  of  acting  which  the 
Son  hath  condescended  unto  :  and  according  to  the  w^ord 
of  the  voice  of  the  Father,  which  the  Son  hath  heard,  and 
bowed  Himself  submissively  to,  the  Holy  Ghost  goeth  forth 
to  do  the  thing :  and  from  the  creature  thus  informed  by 
the  word  of  the  Son,  and  inspired  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  Holy  Ghost  doth  carry  up  unto  the  Father  the  glory  of 
the  creature's  obedience,  and  the  gladness  of  the  creature's 
joy,  and  the  gratitude  of  the  creature's  blessedness.  But  yet 
not  unto  the  Father  direct,  but  through  the  Head,  which  is 
Christ,  who  hath  received  the  dignity  of  Mediator,  and  Inter- 
cessor, and  Priest,  and  King,  wholly  to  intercept  and  to  con- 
vey the  communication  of  the  Godhead  with  the  creatures, 
God  informed ;  because  it  was  through  His  voluntary  obe- 
dience and  humiliation  that  the  creatures  were  created,  were 
spoken  to  when  they  had  fallen,  were  redeemed  from  their 
fallen  state.  This  is  the  superadded  prerogative  of  the  Son, 
and  likewise  the  constitution  of  the  creature,  after  the  Divine 
purpose,  that  the  Father  should  give  unto  the  Son  the  honour 
of  being  its  Sovereign  and  conservative  Head,  together  with 
the  honour  of  conveying  upwards  unto  the  Father  all  its 
homage  and  service  :  so  that  creation,  the  fall,  and  redemp- 
tion amount  simply  to  this,  that  it  is  a  purpose  of  the  Father 
to  give  outward  glory  unto  the  Son,  because  of  that  humilia- 
tion of  Himself  which  He  underwent,  in  order  to  manifest 
forth  the  glory  of  the  Father.  In  both  which  acts,  reciprocal 
from  the  Father  to  the  Son,  and  from  the  Son  to  the  Father, 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  great  agent  and  operator. 

3.  Thirdly,  We   have    maintained    and    made   good   that 


408  THE  INCARNATION: 

through  Christ,  and  Christ  only,  who  is  the  Godhead  in  a 
body,  could  the  Godhead  out  of  a  body,  the  infinite  and  in- 
visible Godhead,  ever  have  been  known.  The  attributes  of 
infinitude  are  not  cognoscible  by  a  finite  creature,  and  I  hold 
that  all  those  a  priori  speculations  concerning  the  attributes 
of  God,  are  nothing  more  than  descriptions  of  the  pure  intellect 
of  man  ; — they  are  the  categories  of  the  pure  reason  of  man, 
and  no  knowledge  of  God  whatever.  God  is  known  by  His 
acts  :  the  invisible  things  of  God  from  the  creation  of  the 
world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that 
are  made,  even  His  eternal  power  and  glory.  Creation 
is  for  the  knowledge  of  God ;  and  the  end  of  creation  is  to 
be  seen  summed  up  in  the  creature-part  of  Christ.  The 
being  of  man  reflects  the  being  of  Christ ;  the  being  of  Christ 
reflecteth  the  being  of  God.  It  is  not  the  tale  which  Christ 
telleth  concerning  the  invisible  world,  as  your  Socinians  talk  ; 
it  is  not  as  a  tale  hearer  at  all,  but  it  is  as  He  is  seen,  as  He 
is,  (not  excluding  what  He  spake  certainly,  but  including 
that  also,)  that  He  sheweth  God.  A  prophet  told  of  God  ; 
but  Christ  is  God,  the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  ex- 
press image  of  His  person,  made  visible  to  the  creatures,  that 
the  creatures  might  see  and  know  Him.  Seeing  and  know- 
ing are  used  synonymously  in  Scripture  ;  as,  for  example, 
"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only-begotten 
Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  revealed 
him."  And  again,  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might 
know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  he 
hath  sent."  An  act,  not  a  thought,  nor  a  word,  is  the  work 
of  God.  The  Father's  it  is  to  will ;  the  Son's  to  word  what 
the  Father  hath  willed  ;  and  the  Spirit's  it  is  to  bring  it  into 
existence,  as  a  thing  separate  and  outward  from  the  Creator. 
In  the  first  form,  it  is  a  purpose ;  in  the  second,  it  is  a  cove- 
nant ;  in  the  third,  it  is  a  work  of  God  accomplished.  Here, 
then,  is  Christ  :  look  upon  Him,  and  know  God  ;  look  away 
from  Him,  and  be  lost  in  darkness  :  hear  Him,  and  believe 
that  what  He  saith  is  in  the  purpose,  and  shall  be  in  the 
manifestation.  And  what  saith  He  .-*  He  saith  that  the 
Father  is  another  Person  from  Himself,  whom  He  worship- 
peth,  whom  He  serveth  ;  and  yet  that  the  invisible  Father  is 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  409 

only  to  be  known,  by  knowing  the  visible  Son,  No  man 
knoweth  the  Father,  but  the  Son,  and  He  to  whom  the  Son 
shall  reveal  Him  :  therefore,  believe  that  the  Father  is  an- 
other Person  from  the  Son,  seeing  He  speaketh  of  them  as 
twain  :  "  I  and  my  Father  will  come  unto  you,  and  we  will 
take  up  our  abode  with  you  :"  and  though  twain,  in  respect 
of  personality,  yet  one  in  substance  ;  for  the  Son  doeth 
nothing  of  Himself,  but  what  He  seeth  the  Father  do  :  "  The 
words  which  I  speak,  I  speak  not  of  myself,  and  the  Father 
which  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth  the  works  :  I  and  my  Father 
are  one.  He  that  hath  seen  me,  Philip,  hath  seen  the  Father ; 
and  how  then  sayest  thou,  Shew  us  the  Father  ?" 

Thus  come  we  by  the  knowledge  of  the  invisible  Godhead 
of  the  Father,  through  the  visible  Godhead  of  the  Son  ;  and 
in  like  manner  come  we  by  the  knowledge  of  the  personality 
and  Godhead  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  Christ  speaketh  of  Him 
as  one  that  is  to  be  sent  to  supply  His  room  when  Pie  is  gone 
away.  He  is  called  another  Comforter.  He  is  the  Spirit  of 
Truth,  which  abideth  always ;  not  the  Son  of  God  who  must 
depart  for  a  season  :  and  as  Christ  heareth  the  Father,  so 
this  other  Divine  Person  heareth  Christ :  "  What  he  shall 
hear,  that  he  shall  speak,  and  he  will  shew  you  things  to 
come."  There  is  between  them  a  distinctity  which  admits  of 
the  personal  pronouns,  his  and  mine :  "  He  shall  take  of  the 
things  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  them  unto  you."  Yet  not  the 
less  is  He  one  with  Christ :  in  act  He  is  what  Christ  is  in 
word.  Christ  breathes  on  them,  and  they  receive  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  Holy  Ghost  must  beget  them  before  they  can 
see  the  kingdom.  This  is  the  power  which  Christ  giveth  to 
them  that  believe ;  to  become  the  sons  of  God  as  He  was 
the  Son  of  God,  through  the  inhabitation  of  His  human 
nature ;  by  that  Holy  Spirit, — and  every  act  of  Christ  is  an 
act  done  by  the  Holy  Spirit ; — His  life,  the  Holy  Spirit's  life ; 
His  holiness,  the  holiness  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  His  power,  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  thus,  from  the  visible  Christ, 
Cometh  the  knowledge  of  the  three  subsistencies  in  the  God- 
head, and  of  their  common  substance,  what  its  purpose  is 
what  its  word  is,  and  what  its  act  is ;  and  knowledge  is  ob- 
tained of  the  invisible  and  unchangeable  God,  by  the  mani- 


4 1 0  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

festation  of  Christ.     And  this  I  regard  as  a  great  end  which 
was  served  by  the  bringing  of  the  Christ  into  the  world. 

4.  Still  further,  as  concerneth  worship,  or  continual  acknow- 
ledgment and  service  of  the  Creator,  as  the  great  first  cause, 
and  deep  abysmal  will,  which  is  separate  from  the  creature, 
yet  the  life  of  the  creature,  and  the  basis  of  its  being  ;  this  is 
a  mystery  which  cannot  be  otherwise  understood,  than  by 
perusing  the  Christ,  who,  though  God,  did  not  worship  Him- 
self, but  did  evermore  worship  the  invisible  Father,  and  yet 
He  was  God.  But  being  God,  united  to  the  creature,  and 
seen  only  through  the  actings  of  the  creature,  it  is  most 
needful  that  nothing  terminate  in  Him,  but  pass  through  Him 
into  the  region  of  the  invisible  :  therefore,  whenever  the  people 
were  disposed  to  rest  in  Him,  He  did  always  refer  them  back 
unto  the  Father,  saying,  "  Ye  cannot  come  unto  me,  except 
the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw  you."  Now,  I  know 
well,  that  the  ignorance  of  this  time,  upon  the  subject  of  the 
Trinity,  passeth  all  ignorance  of  any  former  time  ;  and  there- 
fore I  do  deem  it  of  the  more  importance  to  draw  your  atten- 
tion particularly  to  this  part  of  the  subject  which  concerneth 
worship,  Christ's  human  nature,  inhabited  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  from  which  the  Holy  Ghost  never  was  and  never 
shall  be  separated,  was  not  an  object  of  worship,  and  never 
shall  be  an  object  of  worship;  and  if  Christ  received  worship 
upon  earth,  from  those  who  were  ignorant  of  His  Divinity, 
He  did  receive  it,  not  as  man,  but  as  God.  This  I  hold  to  be 
a  most  important  point  of  doctrine,  and  most  necessary  to 
preserve  men  from  creature-worship,  and,  above  all,  from 
saint-worship  ;  for  I  believe  that  Christ's  human  nature  is  not 
distinct  from,  but  most  closely  united  to,  and  indeed  the  very 
support,  yea,  and  substance,  of  the  renewed  nature  of  every 
believer.  Whosoever  by  faith  eats  His  body  and  drinks  His 
blood,  is  one  with  Him,  as  He  is  one  with  the  Father;  and 
that  is  one  substance  in  diverse  personalities.  As  by  nature 
I  am  of  the  substance  of  Adam,  and  coequal  with  him  in  all 
pains  and  penalties  of  this  fallen  being,  so  by  faith  I  am 
coequal  in  honour,  and  to  be  coequal  in  glory,  with  the 
human  nature  of  Christ ;  one  with  Him,  I  say  again,  as  He  is 
one  with  the  Father.     Such  unity  it  is  as  all  visible  unity 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  411 

only  resembleth,  but  doth  never  equal.  Such  unity  giveth 
faith,  as  that  it  can  be  said,  we  are  of  His  flesh  and  of  His 
bones  ;  and  is  of  the  essence  and  substance  of  faith,  and  He 
who  hath  not  this  hath  no  life  abiding  in  him.  His  human 
nature  is  inhabited  by  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  and  our  human 
nature  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost  likewise  inhabited.  If,  there- 
fore, inhabitation  by  the  Holy  Ghost  maketh  any  creature- 
substance  as  the  body  of  Christ  to  be  worshipped,  then 
must  it  also  make  His  members,  which  are  of  the  same  sub- 
stance, and  by  the  same  Spirit  inhabited,  to  be  in  like  man- 
ner worshipped  ;  and  so  have  you  saint-worship  introduced 
at  once  ;  as,  indeed,  it  was  introduced  into  the  Papal  Church, 
and  must  ever  be  introduced,  where  the  body  of  Christ  is 
worshipped ;  and  it  doth  destroy  the  whole  end  of  redemp- 
tion, which  is  to  get  the  creature  separated  from  the  Creator, 
and  delivered  from  the  worship  of  itself  But  as  the  creature, 
in  its  redeemed  state,  is  inhabited  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  this 
would  constitute  it  an  object  to  be  worshipped,  if  Christ's 
body,  which  is  inhabited  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  might  be  wor- 
shipped. Wherein  then  consisteth  that  pre-eminent  dignity 
of  Christ  above  all  redeemed  creatures,  which  placeth  Him  at 
distance  infinite  above  them,  though  in  substance  most  closely 
united  with  them  }  It  consisteth  in  His  Divine  nature,  with 
which  His  human  nature  mingleth  not,  though  to  it  in  one 
person  united.  This  constituteth  him  Head  over  all,  though 
Brother  of  all  the  redeemed  ;  Brother  by  the  community  of 
the  human  substance,  and  the  inhabitation  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 
Head  by  the  solitary  pre-eminence,  by  the  Divine  dignity  of 
being  the  eternal  and  only-begotten  Son  of  God.  Neverthe- 
less, though  in  His  Divine  personality  He  be  a  proper  object 
of  worship,  like  as  is  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His  Divine  person- 
ality ;  yet,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  inhabiting  the  creature  doth 
cease  from  worship  contemplated  therein,  so  the  Son,  taking 
the  redeemed  creature  into  union  with  His  own  person,  and 
shewing  the  Godhead  in  the  manhood,  doth  cease  from  being 
the  object  of  worship,  being  therein  the  great  Leader  of  the 
chorus,  the  great  Head  of  the  worshippers.  And  who,  then, 
is  the  proper  object  of  worship  .-'  I  answer,  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  one  God ; — not  as  inhabiting  the 


4  r  2  THE  INCARNA  TION: 

creature,  for  then  the  creature  would  worship  a  Deity  within 
itself; — not  as  sustaining  the  redeemed  creature,  for  then  the 
creature  would  worship  its  visible  Head,  and  still  the  object 
of  its  worship  would  be  in  and  of  itself :  but  the  object  of  its 
worship  is  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  their  in- 
visible, incommunicable,  indivisible  being,  represented  in  the 
person  of  the  Father.  Let  no  one  start  at  this,  as  if  it  denied 
worship  to  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Son  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  one  with  the  Father,  who  are  worshipped 
when  He  is  worshipped.  The  Divine  person  of  the  Son  is 
not  contained  in  His  manhood  :  the  ocean,  the  round  immense 
of  space,  were  better  said  to  be  contained  within  a  household 
dish,  than  that  the  Divine  nature  of  the  Son  should  be  con- 
tained in  manhood.  And  to  guard  against  this  error,  is  the 
very  reason  why  divines  rest  so  much  upon  the  distinctness 
of  the  Godhead  from  the  manhood.  But,  save  through  the 
manhood  of  Christ,  God  shall  never  be  known  to  any  crea- 
ture, nor  communicated  to  any  creature  ;  and  for  this  reason, 
that  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  cannot  thus,  or  in  any  way, 
be  to  the  creatures  communicated,  most  necessary  it  is,  in 
order  to  the  existence  of  true  worship,  that  the  Godhead,  not 
in  its  manifested  likeness  and  limited  proportions,  nor  in 
its  felt  influences  and  operative  powers,  but  in  its  invisible, 
ineffable,  incomprehensible  fulness  and  essential  separate- 
ness,  from  the  creature,  that  is,  in  the  person  of  the  Father, 
representing  the  substance  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
should  be  worshipped.  And  this,  verily,  is  the  end  of  the 
whole  mystery.  That  God  should  inhabit  the  creature  in 
the  person  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  yet  not  be  worshipped 
there :  that  God  should  sustain  the  creature,  in  the  person  of 
the  Son,  united  unto  man,  and  yet  not  be  worshipped  there, 
but  be  worshipped  in  the  absolute  invisible  person  of  the 
Father  :  so  that  God  supporteth  all,  inhabiteth  all  the  re- 
deemed creatures,  and,  for  the  security  and  blessedness  there- 
of, receiveth  their  homage  out  of  and  beside  them  all.  Such 
is  the  true  account  of  Divine  worship,  and  such  is  the  way  in 
which  it  is  attained. 

While,  however,  I  argue,  that  the  Godhead,  in  the  person  of 
the  invisible  Father,  approached  unto  by  the  manifest  Christ, 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  413 

through  the  indwelling  Spirit,  is  the  only  ultimate  object  of 
worship  from  whom  all  petitions  are  to  be  sought,  and  all 
favours  understood  to  proceed,  I  do  not  the  less  preserve  unto 
the  Godhead,  manifest  in  the  person  of  the  Son,  a  superlative 
dignity  above  every  visible  creature  ; — the  King  of  all  power  ; 
the  Priest  of  all  holiness ;  the  Heir  of  all  possession  ;  the 
Revealer  of  the  Godhead ;  the  Light  coming  forth  from  the 
mystery  of  light,  in  which  the  Father  dwelleth  inaccessible ; 
the  life,  also,  felt  in  all  redeemed  creatures,  and  the  visible 
object  of  all  their  homage,  reverence,  and  obedience ;  and  so 
bound  to,  and  submitted  to,  and  in  that  sense  worshipped  by, 
all  the  angels  of  God :  as  it  is  written,  "  When  he  bringeth  his 
Son  the  second  time  into  the  world,  he  saith,  And  let  all  the 
angels  of  God  worship  him  :"  and  not  the  angels  only,  but 
every  creature  ;  as  it  is  written,  "  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  might  bow."  But  still,  while  this  supremacy  and 
lordship  of  God-manifest  may  never  be  doubted,  I  argue  not 
the  less  that  Christ  will  suffer  no  worship  to  terminate  in  Him- 
self, as  an  ultimate  object,  but  will  lead  it  up  into  the  invisible 
and  infinite  Godhead  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  where 
again  no  worship  is  received,  nor  petition  answered,  which 
doth  not  come  through  the  manifest  Godhead  as  its  way,  and 
from  the  indwelling  Spirit  as  its  source  :  so  that  the  end  of 
the  whole  matter  is,  that  the  creature  is  taken  into  the  circle 
of  the  intercommunion  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  and  therein 
consisteth  its  blessedness  and  its  stability. 

Now  I  may  say,  that  any  difficulties  which  may  appear  on 
this  subject  vanish  at  once,  to  any  one  who  will  but  look  on 
Christ,  who,  though  He  was  very  God  and  very  man,  did  not 
the  less  direct  His  worship  unto  the  Father,  and  pray  unto 
Him  continually.  And  when  He  gave  that  form  of  prayer, 
commonly  called  the  Lord's  Prayer,  it  was  addressed  unto 
the  Father.  This  was  not  for  example's  sake,  nor  did  it  arise 
out  of  His  humiliation,  but  is  the  example  of  what  He  shall 
ever  be,  as  the  Head  of  redeemed  creation  ;  evermore  direct- 
ing His  homage  unto  the  invisible  God.  Let  no  one  think  that 
this  is  to  derogate  from  the  Divinity  of  the  Son,  or  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  any  more  than  it  is  to  derogate  from  the  Divinity  of  the 
Father,  to  say  that  He  dwelleth  in  us,  by  the  indwelling  of  the 


4 1 4  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

Holy  Ghost,  and  shall  never  otherwise  be  felt ;  any  more  than 
it  derogates  from  the  Divinity  of  the  Father,  to  say  that  He  is 
manifest  in  the  Son.  It  is  not  the  Holy  Ghost  inhabiting  mere- 
ly, but  it  is  the  substance  of  the  Godhead,  in  the  person  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  it  is  not  the  Son  merely,  sustaining  and 
redeeming  all  things,  but  it  is  the  Godhead  in  the  Person  of 
the  Son  ;  and  it  is  not  the  Father  merely  that  is  worshipped, 
but  it  is  the  Godhead  in  the  Person  of  the  Father,  and  the 
Son  is  worshipped  equally  with  the  Father  ;  and  so,  also,  the 
Holy  Ghost :  and  the  Father  is  manifested  equally  with  the 
Son  ;  and  so,  also,  is  the  Holy  Ghost :  and  the  Father  inha- 
biteth  equally  with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  so,  also,  doth  the 
Son.  The  same  substance  is  present  in  the  threefold  per- 
sonalities ;  the  personalities  most  distinct,  the  substance  most 
entirely  one.  And  herein  is  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  most 
excellent  and  most  glorious ;  and  herein  are  all  Sabellian 
schemes  of  the  Trinity,  which  do  not  hold  the  distinctness  of 
the  personalities,  devoutly  to  be  abhorred  ;  for,  if  you  keep 
not  the  personalities  distinct,  observe  what  follows.  Con- 
found the  personality  of  the  Son  with  the  personality  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  or  deny  the  latter,  which  is  virtually,  yea,  and 
avowedly  too,  a  most  wide-spread  heresy ;  and  it  imme- 
diately follows,  that  every  member  of  Christ,  inhabited  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  is  upon  an  equal  footing  with  Christ ; — that 
every  one  of  us  is  an  Immanuel,  or  God  with  us,  as  certain 
blasphemously  affirm  ; — and  straightway  there  follows  upon 
this  a  total  loss  of  Christ's  great  act  of  love  and  of  atonement. 
Again,  confound  the  personality  of  the  Father  with  the  per- 
sonality of  the  Son,  which  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  done 
by  worshipping  the  Son  as  the  ultimate  object  of  worship,  in- 
stead of  regarding  Him  as  High  Priest  and  Intercessor,  and 
you  mingle  at  once  God  and  the  creature  ;  and  will  come  to 
worship  Him,  not  as  a  personal  God,  separate  from  the  crea- 
ture, but  as  a  widely-diffused  power  and  omnipresent  influ- 
ence. So  that,  without  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  of  persons 
in  a  unity  of  substance,  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  and 
revelation,  of  a  creation,  of  a  fall,  and  of  a  regeneration,  is  an 
ineffectual  and  vain  display  of  power  and  suffering,  which  ac- 
complisheth  nothing. 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  415 

II.  So  much  have  I  to  say  with  respect  to  the  light  which 
this  discourse  of  the  incarnation  casteth  upon  the  actings  of 
the  one  Godhead  in  a  Trinity  of  Persons  to  the  ends  of  crea- 
tion, revelation,  and  worship  :  and  I  now  proceed  to  see  what 
light  it  sheddeth  upon  the  reconstituted  creation  under  Christ 
the  Head  thereof  In  creation  there  are  three  things  to  be 
kept  distinct  by  an  impassable  gulf  The  first  is,  the  re- 
deemed creature  ;  the  second  is,  the  Head  of  the  redeemed 
creature  ;  the  third,  the  invisible  God.  If  the  creature  jostle 
or  mingle  with  its  Head,  then  the  procuring  cause  of  its  re- 
demption, and  the  abiding  cause  of  its  stability,  atonement, 
intercession,  manifestation  of  God,  and  everything  else,  which 
since  the  fall  hath  been  transacted,  and  till  the  giving  up  of 
the  kingdom  remaineth  to  be  transacted,  becometh  a  dead 
and  unmeaning  thing.  Therefore,  I  say,  the  Head  of  the  re- 
deemed creation  and  the  redeemed  creation  must  be  distinct 
and  separate  by  a  gulf  impassable.  This  is  the  first  distinct- 
ness ;  and  these  two  existences  so  distinct  must  yet  be  united 
more  closely  than  any  visible  union  :  for  every  visible  union 
is  disunited,  as  the  body  from  the  soul,  and  the  members  of 
the  body  from  each  other  ;  but  by  an  indissoluble  union  must 
the  redeemed  creature  be  united  with  its  Head,  in  order  that 
it  may  know  and  feel  that  it  standeth  only  in  Christ,  and 
through  Christ  only  can  worship  the  Father.  Now  this 
union,  beyond  all  unions  close,  yet  in  distinctness  and  separa- 
tion impassable,  is  compassed  by  the  union  of  the  two  natures 
in  the  Person  of  Christ.  Christ  the  Head,  being  God  and  re- 
deemed manhood  in  one  Person,  which  redeemed  manhood 
maketh  the  redeemed  creature  of  one  substance  with  Him  ; 
so  that  in  that  manhood  every  elect  creature  standeth,  and 
yet  no  elect  creature  tasteth  of  His  Godhead  ;  and  thus  is 
the  Christ  personal  separated  from,  yet  united  to,  the  Christ 
mystical,  with  all  that  dependeth  thence.  To  constitute  the 
union,  the  Holy  Ghost  laboureth  ;  to  preserve  the  distinct- 
ness, the  distinct  personality  of  the  Son  from  that  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  prevaileth  :  and  finally,  to  prevent  the  creature 
thus  redeemed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  headed  up  in  Christ, 
from  aspiring  to,  or  mixing  with,  the  invisible  Godhead  ;  to 
throw  in  another  impassable  gulf  between  the  creature   re- 


4 1 6  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

deemed  by  the  Son,  inhabited  by  the  Spirit,  and  the  invisible, 
infinite,  incommunicable,  incomprehensible  Godhead,  the  dis- 
tinct personality  of  the  Father  prevaileth.  So  that  to  accom- 
plish this  threefold  distinctness,  (and  unless  this  be  accom- 
plished, all,  all  is  vain,)  nothing  prevaileth,  but  the  distinct 
separate  personalities  of  the  Godhead,  never  to  be  con- 
founded, in  one  substance  never  to  be  disunited.  The  doc- 
trine of  the  Trinity  is  the  only  view  of  God  which  will  give 
Him  separateness  from  the  creature,  and  yet  communicate  to 
the  creature  of  His  indefectibility  and  blessedness  :  and  the 
great  end  served  by  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the 
flesh  is  the  making  known  of  the  great  truth  of  the  Godhead 
as  one  substance  in  three  persons  subsisting,  whose  distinct- 
ness from  one  another  is  the  ground  and  basis  of  all  distinc- 
tion between  the  redeemed  creature  inhabited  and  possessed 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  its  Head,  which  is  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ;  and  between  these  two,  considered  as  the  whole 
visible  existence,  and  the  invisible  Godhead,  This  necessity 
of  perfect  distinctness  between  these  three  subsistences — to 
wit,  the  redeemed  creature,  the  Head  of  the  redeemed  crea- 
ture, and  the  invisible  Godhead, — is  the  reason,  and  ground, 
and  fruit  of  the  doctrine  of  the  three  persons  in  the  Godhead. 

Now,  this  is  a  subject  of  such  great  importance  in  itself, 
and  in  its  consequences  so  unbounded,  and  withal  a  subject 
so  little  understood,  or  treated  as  a  speculation, — whereas,  it 
is  the  only  defence  against  Spinozism,  and  Sabellianism,  and 
that  philosophy  of  the  West  and  religion  of  the  East,  which 
makes  God  the  soul  of  the  creatures,  or  the  creatures  an 
emanation  from  God, — that  I  deem  it  good  to  open  it  at 
some  length,  and  to  shew  how  it  is  the  essence  and  the  sub- 
stance of  all  sound  doctrine  whatsoever  concerning  the  crea- 
tures, and  concerning  God  the  object  of  the  creature's  worship. 

I.  The  end  of  God,  in  giving  existence  beside  Himself,  is  to 
communicate  life  in  such  a  way  as  shall  consist  with  His  own 
being  and  glory.  Accordingly,  the  creation  was  completed 
in  a  living  soul ;  but  Adam,  thus  formed,  was  not  the  perfect 
or  complete  creature,  but  only  the  likeness  or  type  of  Him 
that  is  to  be.  And  therefore  Adam  could  not  have  eternal 
or  immortal  life  to  give ;  which  required  that  the  life  should 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  417 

be  manifested,  which  was  done  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  who 
brought  life  and  immortaHty  to  light.  In  Him  was  life,  and 
to  Him  only  it  belongeth  to  convey  life,  who  could  say,  "  I 
am  the  life.  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life  :  he  that  be- 
lieveth  in  me  shall  never  die  :  he  that  believeth  in  me  hath  ever- 
lasting life."  Adam  was  not  the  life,  nor  was  he  able  to  com- 
municate eternal  life  ;  as  it  is  written,  "  The  first  man  Adam 
was  a  living  soul,  the  Second  Adam  a  life-giving  Spirit." 
Adam  therefore,  the  head  of  creation's  unfallen  state,  was 
only  to  prepare  the  way  for  Christ.  The  Son  of  God  was  to 
come  in  flesh,  or  in  human  nature ;  and,  therefore,  there  must 
be  flesh,  or  human  nature  in  which  He  might  come.  If  Adam 
had  possessed  life  in  himself,  then  no  one  should  have  been 
able  to  take  it  from  him,  and  God's  gifts  are  without  repent- 
ance. Seeing,  then,  that  death  did  lay  hold  upon  him,  it  is 
proof  sufficient  that  God  had  not  invested  him  with  eternal 
life,  over  which  death  hath  not  any  power.  Creation,  there- 
fore, in  its  unfallen  state,  was  only  to  make  way  for  creation 
in  the  fallen  state ;  and  this,  though  last  in  accomplishment, 
was,  as  consisteth  with  the  very  idea  of  a  purpose,  first  in  the 
design.  So  far,  therefore,  is  it  from  being  derogatory  unto 
God  for  one  to  say,  that  creation  was  only  the  imperfect  rudi- 
ments of  His  work,  that  it  is  the  only  way  of  preserving  the 
honour  and  glory  of  God.  For  if  herein  He  put  forth  all  His 
strength,  and  gave  Adam  immortal  life,  then  is  the  fall  a 
failure,  and  redemption  is  an  after-thought,  an  expedient  to 
remedy  and  repair  a  failure,  and  God  hath  no  purpose  nor 
foresight  of  things  at  all ;  and  there  is  a  chance  and  possibility 
that  the  redemption  also  may  be,  by  some  unforeseen  hap  and 
hazard, likewise  subverted  and  overthrown;  and  there  is  neither 
ground  for  faith,  nor  yet  for  hope,  nor  for  promise,  nor  for 
fulfilment,  nor  for  covenant,  nor  for  faithfulness  of  an  Almighty 
God  at  all. 

We  may,  therefore,  without  offence  unto,  but  in  high  justi- 
fication of,  God,  inquire  a  little  into  the  necessity  of  a  fall,  for 
the  accomplishment  of  God's  purpose.  The  creature  unfallen 
was  very  good,  but  it  knew  not  evil  as  yet ;  and,  not  knowing 
evil,  it  could  not  know  its  own  inferiority  to,  and  distinctness 
from,  God  :  for  God  is  also  very  good,  and  the  creature  is  very 

VOL.  V.  2D 


4 1 8  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

good  ;  how  shall  the  creature  distinguish  between  itself  and 
God  ?  Moreover,  God  is  invisible,  and  the  creature  is  visible, 
and  by  so  much  the  creature  is  in  advantage  over  God.  In 
that  state,  therefore,  the  creature  could  not  fulfil  the  great 
end  of  God,  that  it  should  pay  its  homage,  and  place  its  de- 
pendence upon  God  ;  which  if  any  one  deny,  then  I  appeal 
unto  the  fact,  that  the  first  time  the  creature  was  tried  with  a 
temptation,  though  the  weakest  imaginable,  he,  or  rather  she, 
preferred  the  inanimate  creature  unto  God  ;  and  he  preferred 
the  love  of  woman  unto  the  obedience  of  God  ; — proof  posi- 
tive, experiment  decisive,  and  so  arranged  of  God,  for  the 
ending  of  all  strife  upon  this  subject,  and  for  proving  beyond 
a  question,  that  the  creation  state  was  not  the  state  in  which 
a  creature  could  stand  and  worship  God. 

If  any  one  cut  me  short  here  with  an  interruption,  and  ask, 
Why  then  put  the  creature  forth  in  the  creation  state  at  all } 
why  not  bring  in  the  Second  Adam  at  the  beginning,  and 
present  Him  in  the  glorious  humanity  at  once,  as  He  was  being 
risen  from  the  dead  .■'  This  indeed,  I  answer,  would  have  pre- 
vented the  necessity  of  a  fall ;  but  it  would  have  been  as  far 
as  ever  from  accomplishing  the  end  of  God,  which  is  not  merely 
eternal  life  in  the  creature,  but  along  with  this  consciousness 
of  a  being  separate  from  God,  as  the  indispensable  preliminary 
unto  the  worship  of  God  only,  and  not  of  itself  also.  For  if 
Christ  had  come  in  the  unfallen  state,  God  and  man,  putting 
forth  the  power  of  the  Godhead  and  the  wisdom  of  Godhead 
in  the  creature  form,  it  would  have  made  things  worse,  instead 
of  better,  with  the  creature,  unto  which  He  propagated,  or 
communicated,  the  same  glorious  and  eternal  life ;  for  there 
would  have  been  no  act  demonstrative  of  the  creature's  sepa- 
rateness  from  the  Godhead  of  the  Son.  From  the  first  of  its 
existence,  upon  this  hypothesis,  it  standeth  supported  by  the 
power,  and  shewing  forth  the  glory  of  God  ;  and  so  it  is  to  con- 
tinue without  a  change  of  its  condition,  with  no  knowledge  of 
its  infirmity,  with  every  experience  of  its  power  and  suffi- 
ciency ;  and  how  such  a  creature  should  know  of  a  Godhead 
beyond  and  beside  itself,  how  it  should  know  itself  not  to  be 
the  all-sufficient  God,  is  what  I  cannot  for  a  moment  imagine. 
For,  as  I  said  in  the  former  head  of  discourse,  these  are  things 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  419 

not  to  be  told  by  words,  but  to  be  embodied  in  the  being  of 
things.  A  word  must  have  a  correspondency,  in  the  being  of 
him  who  is  spoken  to,  or  it  amounteth  to  nothing  ;  and  espe- 
cially such  a  word  as  this,  that  there  is  a  God  beside  the 
creature,  whom  to  know,  to  worship,  and  to  enjoy,  is  the  very 
end  of  the  creature,  must  not  be  left  to  an  airy  carriage,  but 
must  be  infixed  in  the  heart  of  being  itself ;  for  which,  upon 
this  idea,  that  Christ  in  the  form  of  risen  God-man  is  brought 
into  the  world  first  of  all,  there  is  no  provision  in  the  being 
of  the  creatures  propagated  by  Him,  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
everything  to  confuse,  to  bewilder,  and  to  contradict  the 
knowledge  of  an  invisible  God,  above  and  beside  themselves, 
who  is  to  be  worshipped. 

In  order,  therefore,  to  preserve  distinctness  between  the  in- 
visible and  absolute  God  and  the  visible  limited  creature,  it  was 
necessary  that  the  creature  should  fall ;  and,  by  falling,  should 
know  the  end  and  inferiority  that  is  in  itself;  and  that  the 
goodness  which  it  had  originally,  is  a  goodness  derived  from 
another  source  than  itself,  seeing  there  hath  not  been,  in  itself, 
the  power  of  retaining  it.  And  to  the  end  the  creature  might 
know  evil  by  feeling  evil,  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  also 
know  ^ood  by  feeling  good.  There  must  exist  in  the  crea- 
ture, after  it  hath  fallen,  something  to  be  unto  it  for  a  con- 
tinual memorial  of  its  state  above  the  fall ;  that  is,  there 
must  be  a  conscience  of  good  struggling  against  the  oppres- 
sion of  evil.  If  the  creature  were  all  evil,  without  a  con- 
science of  good,  then  there  would  be  no  memorial,  no  remem- 
brance of  its  unfallen  state  ;  which  would  stand  only  as  a  page 
of  the  book,  instead  of  being  written  on  the  heart  of  man. 
Mistake  ne  not,  as  if  I  held  the  Pelagian,  and  what  is  now 
called  Arminian,  though  it  is  baser  still  than  Arminian  heresy, 
that  man  can  do  any  good  thing  in  himself ;  for  it  is  one  thing 
not  to  be  at  all,  and  another  thing  to  be  in  bondage ;  it  is  one 
thing  to  be  a  devil,  and  another  thing  to  be  under  the  oppression 
of  the  devii.  I  believe  with  St  Paul,  that  God  leaveth  not  the 
wickedest  heathen  without  a  witness;  that  there  is  a  law  written 
in  the  heart,  and  that  there  are  thoughts  which  accuse  or  else 
excuse  one  another.  The  state  above  the  fall  was  a  state  of 
goodness  ;  the  state  below  the  fall  is  a  state  of  the  know- 


420  THE  INCARNATION: 

ledge  of  good  and  evil ; — not  the  knowledge  of  evil  only,  but 
the  knowledge  of  good  also ;  and  yet  in  this  consisteth  the 
wickedness  of  it,  that  there  should  be  the  knowledge  of  evil  at 
all,  and  the  obedience  of  it  at  all.  It  is  this  warfare  in  itself, 
it  is  this  incompleteness  in  itself,  (which  is,  I  may  say,  the 
great  fact  of  human  existence,  denied  by  none  except  a  few 
Stoics,  who  form  the  small  exception  that  confirms  the  rule ;) 
— it  is  this  incompleteness,  whether  you  look  to  the  body  or 
to  the  mind  ;  pain  and  death,  in  the  former  ;  error,  prejudice, 
ignorance,  and  dark  uncertainty  beyond  the  grave,  in  the 
latter ; — this  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  prevalence  of 
the  evil  over  the  good,  which  is  felt  by  sage  and  by  savage* 
by  prince  and  by  peasant  alike ;  for  all  suffer,  and  all  die, 
and  all  by  nature  are  in  trouble,  and  dark  uncertainty  ; — 
this  is  the  very  condition  of  conscious  existence  unto  which 
the  creature  must  be  brought,  in  order  that  the  creature 
may  know  itself  not  to  be  God.  For  set  the  greatest  atheist 
before  me,  and  I  will  pose  him  with  a  single  question  :  Whence 
hadst  thou  thy  manifold  thoughts,  purposes,  sufferings,  and 
enjoyments  .''  Is  it  not  from  life  .-'  Yea,  from  life,  he  must 
answer ;  for  the  dead  have  them  not.  Shew  whence  hast  thou 
life  ?  Not  from  thyself,  else  thou  couldst  keep  it ;  but  keep 
it  thou  canst  not.  Not  from  other  men,  for  they  are  in  the 
like  plight.  Then  thou  hast  it  from  One  unseen,  who  can 
only  be  known  by  this,  that  He  hath  life  in  Himself ;  that 
He  can  lay  it  down,  and  take  it  up  again,  and  give  it  even 
eternally  unto  whom  it  pleaseth  Him  ;  and  thus  death  is  the 
great  demonstration  unto  the  creature  of  a  God,  besides  and 
over  the  creature  :  and  resurrection  from  death,  and  power  to 
overcome  death,  and  to  communicate  a  life  which  is  eternal, 
is  the  great  demonstration  that  He  who  doth  it  is  not  a  crea- 
ture, but  is  God.  The  creatures,  therefore,  were  brought  into 
the  condition  of  death,  that  they  might  be  negatived,  might 
know  themselves  not  to  be  God  ;  might  know  that  He,  who 
should  be  above  and  over  this  condition  of  death,  is  the  very 
God.  So  that  I  may  take  a  step  here  in  advance,  and  say, 
that  in  no  other  way  than  by  coming  under  the  power  of 
death,  and  overcoming  death,  when  under  its  power,  could  the 
eternal  Son  of  God,  when  He  came,  have  been  known  to  be 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  421 

the  very  God.  And  this  I  believe  to  be  the  reason  why- 
Christ  and  the  resurrection  were  preached  together  :  Christ, 
to  shew  that  He  was  the  Messiah,  or  the  Seed  of  the  woman, 
so  long  promised  ;  the  resurrection,  to  shew  that  He  was  God. 
Wherefore  also  Paul  maketh  express  declaration,  (Rom.  i.  4,) 
"  That  he  was  determined  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power, 
according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead."  Wherefore  also  Peter  declareth,  that  God  by 
the  resurrection  hath  proved  Him  to  be  "both  Lord  and 
Christ." 

2.  The  end,  therefore,  of  the  fall  of  creation  under  death, 
being  no  other  than  to  separate  and  distinguish  the  creature 
from  the  Creator,  and  to  put  a  negative  upon  every  creature's 
pretension  to  be  God,  that  the  solitary  creature  who  should 
overcome  death  might  be  known  to  be  God,  we  may  well 
conceive  how  important  an  end  in  the  great  scheme  and  pur- 
pose of  God  it  is  to  keep  the  distinction  for  ever  clear.  And 
let  us  now  follow  onward  to  the  redemption,  and  see  how  it  is 
provided  for  in  this  third  stage  of  the  creature.  This  brings 
us  to  consider  the  Son  of  God,  the  great  Head  of  redemption, 
who  appeared  as  a  man  in  all  respects;  a  man  indeed  anoint- 
ed with  the  Holy  Ghost  above  measure,  but  still  a  very  man, 
and  a  fallen  man  also  in  all  the  attributes  of  a  fallen  man, 
except  that  He  never  sinned  ;  who  also  was  cut  off  by  death, 
thereby  proving  Himself  to  have  taken  the  form  of  the  fallen 
creature ;  but  before  going  into  death,  continually  declaring, 
that  He  would  rise  again,  and  overcome  death,  and  never 
see  corruption  ;  which  accordingly  having  accomplished,  He 
proveth  himself  to  be  not  a  creature,  but  the  Creator  of  the 
creatures,  who,  though  in  human  form,  was  not  subject  unto 
humanity's  laws  :  and  at  the  same  time  He  proveth,  that  the 
creature  substance  which  He  had  taken  is  not  of  the  Godhead 
apart,  but  with  the  Godhead  united,  and  thence  deriving  ever- 
lasting life.  Be  it  moreover  observed,  that  in  the  like  manner 
He  dealeth  with  all  the  redeemed,  propagating  in  them  their 
eternal  life,  before  they  die,  according  to  His  own  word,  "  He 
that  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life."  Every  believer 
hath  now,  and  doth  not  wait  for,  everlasting  life.  But  to  the 
end  that  he  may  know  that  this  eternal  life  is  not  inherent  in 


42  2  THE  INCARNATION: 

the  creature  itself,  or  in  any  powers  which  it  possesseth,  it  is 
so  ordered,  that  it  should  exist  in  the  creature,  while  in  a 
dying  state,  and  not  prevent  the  creature  from  dying,  but 
permit  the  dissolution  of  body  and  soul,  which  is  death ;  to 
the  end,  that  every  creature  who  is  redeemed  might  know  of 
a  surety,  that  not  from  itself,  but  from  a  Power  without  itself, 
it  hath  this  present  regeneration  unto  eternal  life,  and  is  to 
have  the  future  resurrection  to  the  same.  Now,  at  this  point 
of  the  subject  it  is,  that  a  new  distinction  is  revealed  to  us, 
which  is  the  distinction  between  the  Father  of  this  new  life,  or 
the  Second  Adam,  and  the  children.  To  shew  out  this  dis- 
tinctness between  Christ,  the  Head  of  the  redemption,  and 
the  redeemed  ones,  is  a  first  and  primary  object  of  the  re- 
demption which  now  cometh  into  view,  and  which  is  procured 
by  that  very  thing,  that  while  we  are  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  Christ  reneweth  us  unto  God,  and  sustaineth  us  in  this 
renewed  estate,  not  only  without  the  help,  but  in  despite  of 
all  the  powers  of  sin  and  death  weighing  down  the  creature. 
If  this  second  distinction  be  lost,  an  evil  is  sustained  of  hardly 
less  amount  than  by  the  loss  of  the  distinctness  between  the 
creature  and  the  Creator,  For  the  whole  power,  and  strength, 
and  love,  and  grace  of  God  in  Christ  is  lost,  and  Christ's  own 
Divine  nature  is  lost,  and  the  Divine  nature  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  also,  if  we  do  not  preserve  Christ  as  a  head  of  power  and 
fountain  of  holiness.  And  of  truth,  the  merit  of  Christ  de- 
parts, the  value  of  His  life  and  death,  as  an  atonement,  is  lost, 
everything  escapes  the  vision  and  hold  of  the  mind,  if  the 
man  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  Father  of  redeemed  ones,  be  not  in  some 
conspicuous  way  distinguished  from  the  redeemed  ones  whom 
He  begetteth.  Which  great  distinction  is  secured,  by  His  do- 
ing the  thing  for  every  one  of  us  while  we  underlie  the  curse  of 
sin  and  death.  His  life  and  death  brought  Him  to  our  level, 
His  resurrection,  and  His  regenerating  of  us  while  under  the 
curse  of  sin  and  death,  proveth  Him  to  be  the  procuring  cause, 
the  instrumental  cause,  the  final  cause;  and,  in  "one  word, 
the  all  in  all  of  our  redemption.  And  this  is  likewise  the 
demonstration  of  His  Divinity.  Every  act  of  communicating 
life  unto  a  creature  fallen,  and  held  to  death  by  God's  appoint- 
ment, is  an  act  as  demonstrative  of  Godhead  as  is  the  resur- 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  423 

rection  itself.  And  hence,  I  may  observe  in  passing,  it  cometh 
to  pass,  that  even  under  the  kingdom,  men  will  be  subject 
unto  death,  because  otherwise  they  could  not  know  and  ex- 
perience the  headship  of  Christ.  And,  therefore,  the  last 
enemy  that  is  to  be  destroyed  is  death  ;  and  so  it  cometh 
to  pass,  that  death  is  God's  great  means  of  giving  dignity  and 
demonstration  of  Divinity  unto  the  Prince  of  Life. 

The  redemption,  therefore,  doth  introduce  us  to  a  new  dis- 
tinction, the  distinction  between  the  fallen  creature  redeemed, 
and  its  Divine  redemption-head  ;  which  distinction  forms  the 
basis  of  all  our  obligations  unto  Christ,  and  constitutes  the 
inferiority  and  dependence  of  the  redeemed  creation  upon 
Christ  its  Head.  So  that,  while  He  is  a  creature.  He  is  yet 
above  the  creatures  ;  while  He  is  Head  unto  the  Church,  He 
is  yet  above  the  Church  ;  linking  the  whole  creation  unto 
Himself  in  firmest  bond  by  His  human  nature,  and  by  His 
Divine  connecting  it  with  the  Godhead, — truly  Mediator  be- 
tween the  invisible  Godhead  and  the  visible  creature,  the  way 
unto  the  Father,  and  the  Father's  way  unto  us  !  Now,  to 
give  this  distinctness  is  another  great  end  of  the  fall  of  the 
creatures.  For  being  by  their  fall  taught  their  wickedness 
and  their  weakness,  they  were  thereby  prepared  to  receive 
and  acknowledge  righteousness  and  strength  in  Him  who 
should  recover  and  restore  them.  But  for  the  fall,  the  eter- 
nal Son  of  God  could  not  have  been  known  by  the  creatures, 
in  any  of  His  offices,  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King ;  in  any  of 
His  names,  as  Jesus,  Christ,  and  Lord.  So  that  the  fall  is  as 
essential  for  giving  the  God-man  His  dignity  over  and  above 
the  creatures,  as  it  is  for  teaching  the  creature  its  distinctness 
from  the  invisible  and  incomprehensible  Godhead. 

3.  Thus  then  have  we  established  two  great  distinctions, 
and  three  great  distinct  substances.  First,  The  invisible, 
infinite,  absolute  Godhead ;  secondly,  The  manifest  God- 
head in  the  Son  of  man ;  and,  thirdly,  The  redeemed  crea- 
tures. And  now  I  have  to  add  a  fourth,  which  is.  The 
unredeemed  creation,  or  the  reprobate  part  of  the  creatures. 
The  whole  creation  hath  fallen,  excepting  only  a  part  of  the 
angelic  form  of  being  who  are  elect  in  Christ,  and  intended,  in 
the  Divine  purpose,  to  shew  the  mighty  power  of  the  Christ- 


424  THE  INCARNATION: 

head  of  creation,  which  should  stretch  its  arms  of  salvation 
both  ways,  and  sustain  the  infirmity  of  the  creature  in  all  its 
forms.  The  elect  angels,  no  doubt,  looked  for^vard  to  Him 
that  was  to  come,  and  stood  in  that  hope  ;  they  were  His 
witnesses  in  the  spiritual  region  of  creation ;  they  are  His 
trophy,  won  from  that  domain  wherein  sin  was  first  conceived, 
because  that  domain  was  first  in  being.  Besides  these,  the 
rest  of  creation  hath  all  fallen  ;  and  out  of  that  fall,  God  hath 
from  the  beginning  been  signifying  His  purpose  to  take,  by 
redemption,  a  part,  and  only  a  part.  Therefore  He  separated 
the  clean  and  the  unclean  of  animals,  and  required  the  clean 
to  be  presented  in  sacrifice,  in  order  to  signify  that  the  elected 
part  should  be  made  a  sacrifice  of,  as  was  first  shewn  in  Christ, 
and  now  is  shewing  in  the  Church.  Then,  from  amongst  the 
families  of  the  earth,  He  chose  one  to  bless  above  the  rest, 
with  His  covenant ;  and  now,  from  all  the  Gentiles,  He  is 
taking  whom  it  pleaseth  Him  to  take.  The  end  of  this  mys- 
tery of  electing  only  a  part,  is  to  shew  forth  God's  sovereignty, 
and  God's  right  over  the  creatures  ;  to  establish  the  immut- 
able distinction  between  God  and  the  creature  still  more 
effectually,  and  above  all  to  mark  out,  for  ever,  the  nature  of 
guilt,  the  nature  of  sin.  If  the  scheme  of  God  had  ended  in 
the  redemption  of  all  the  creatures,  then  it  would  have  seemed 
but  a  great  scheme  for  manifesting  His  own  power  and  being, 
as  the  Three-one  God  ;  for  distinguishing  Himself  from  the 
creature,  and  securing  to  Himself  the  worship  of  the  creature, 
and  unto  the  creature  its  own  blessedness  :  but  God  being  a 
holy  God,  the  nature  of  holiness  itself,  the  nature  of  sin,  and 
the  nature  of  atonement  and  satisfaction,  the  nature  of  priest- 
hood, which  is  an  essential  part  of  Christ,  as  the  Head  of  the 
creatures,  would  have  been  for  ever  lost ;  for  if  sin,  after  any 
curve  of  aberration,  or  cycle  of  change,  is  able  to  arrive  at  the 
same  point  with  holiness,  then,  at  that  point,  the  difference 
between  sin  and  holiness  ceaseth  for  ever.  It  turns  out  that 
there  is  no  essential  and  eternal  difference  between  the  obe- 
dience and  the  disobedience  of  God,  but  only  a  temporary 
and  expedient  one  ;  and  it  further  follows,  that  the  creatures 
have  only  been  in  the  hand  of  God  like  the  men  upon  a  chess- 
board, to  perform  a  certain  great  exploit  of  purpose  and  fore- 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  425 

cast.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  moreover,  that  this 
scheme  of  saving  all  at  the  last,  doth  destroy  the  very  exist- 
ence of  a  will  altogether ;  and  a  will  is  the  substance  of  a 
spirit,  of  an  intelligent  being  :  reason,  without  a  will,  is  like  a 
visible  world  without  a  sensible  creature  to  possess  it.  The 
will  is  before  reason,  as  the  sense  is  before  the  sensible  world. 
Now,  if  the  fallen  will  should  not  manifest  for  ever  its  un- 
changeableness  in  itself,  the  demonstration  would  be  wanting 
of  what  a  will  is,  which  would  seem  to  be  nothing  else  than  a 
material  substance  which  changed  and  changed  again  for 
ever.  All  this,  and  much  more,  I  can  see  would  flow  from 
the  universal  redemption  of  all  the  fallen  creatures.  Repro- 
bation, eternal  reprobation  of  a  part,  is  the  very  ground  upon 
which  the  nature  of  sin  resteth,  without  which  sin  is  but  a 
change,  ordained  of  God,  whereof  the  creature  must  be  pa- 
tient ;  a  circumstance  of  creation,  which  we  must  be  content 
for  a  while  to  stand  under,  but  which  will  soon  betake  itself 
away.  The  very  possibility  of  understanding  the  true  differ- 
ence between  obedience  and  disobedience,  throughout  eter- 
nity, would  be  destroyed  ;  government  under  Christ  would 
be,  what  government  under  Christ's  lieutenants  on  the  earth 
hath  at  length  become,  on  principles  of  expediency  alone  ad- 
ministered ;  a  frightful  materialism  would  invert  all  things ; 
and  God  would  be  the  world,  and  the  world  would  be  God. 

Besides  this,  it  were  to  lose  the  whole  end  of  God's  scheme 
in  bringing  His  purpose  to  pass,  by  a  creation,  and  a  fall,  and 
a  redemption,  instead  of  bringing  it  to  pass  by  one  single  act, 
were  a  part  of  the  creature  not  left  for  ever  in  an  unredeemed 
state.  For,  as  hath  been  so  often  said,  the  great  end  of  the 
scheme  is  to  separate  between  the  creature  and  the  Creator, 
and,  in  bringing  it  up  again  from  its  fall,  so  to  bring  it  up  as 
that,  while  it  stood  infallibly,  by  standing  in  Christ,  the  Head, 
it  should  yet  know  itself  not  to  be  God,  by  knowing  itself  not 
to  be  its  head,  and  by  knowing  even  its  Head  not  to  be  the 
infinite  and  invisible  God,  but  only  such  a  manifestation  of 
Him  as  the  creatures  are  competent  to  apprehend.  If  now, 
as  the  Universalists  falsely  assert,  there  should  be  no  repro- 
bation of  the  creatures,  there  would  be  no  evidence  of  what 
creation  is  when  standing  out  of  God.     Redemption  would 


426  THE  INCARNATION: 

have  no  glory  above  creation,  because  creation  hath  no  appa- 
rent inferiority  beneath  redemption.  And  as  I  beheve  that 
redemption  and  its  glories,  above  creation  and  its  infirmities, 
is  the  very  principle  with  which  God  will  go  forth  to  people 
the  spheres  innumerable  with  which  we  are  surrounded,  I  do 
hold  it  to  be  a  most  essential  point,  that  the  glories  of  re- 
demption should  be  seen  reflected  from  the  dark  background 
of  a  reprobate  creation,  existing  under  the  conditions  of  the 
second  death.  For,  if  there  be  one  principle  which,  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  until  now,  hath  been  declared  at 
sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  this  is  the  principle, 
that  the  chosen  and  elected  part  is  chosen  of  free  grace, 
chiefly  for  the  end  of  shewing  forth  the  wickedness  of  the 
part  not  elected.  In  one  word,  without  reprobation  of  the 
fallen  creatures,  helpless  and  irremediable,  free  grace  is  no 
better  than  an  empty  name.  Grace  is  favour  where  no  right 
remained,  where  no  far-distant  possibility  of  reparation  ex- 
isted, where  no  law  nor  scheme  of  God  comprehended  restora- 
tion, and  where  restoration  could  not  otherwise  than  by  grace 
come  to  pass. 

4.  Seeing,  therefore,  it  is  essential  for  every  good  and  holy 
purpose  of  the  Creator,  that  a  part  of  the  creation  should  be 
left  in  its  fallen  state,  or  rather  brought  up  again  by  a  resur- 
rection, and  be  constituted  in  the  estate  of  the  second  death 
which  is  not  annihilation,  and  which  is  not  life,  but  the 
second  death,  in  which  the  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is 
not  quenched,  the  question  next  occurs,  by  what  means,  and 
by  what  mighty  workmanship,  is  the  redemption  of  the  part 
to  be  redeemed  accomplished  ?  This  is  taught  us  in  the  re- 
demption of  the  body  of  Christ,  concerning  which  we  have 
already  discoursed.  The  fallen  woman's  substance  was,  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  sanctified,  and  preserved  holy,  against  all 
the  powers  of  hell  and  death.  The  human  will  of  Christ  was, 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  preserved  perfectly  con- 
centric with  the  divine  and  absolute  will  of  the  Godhead,  so 
that  the  latter  found  the  former  always  a  vehicle  for  express- 
ing itself  intelligibly  to  the  creatures  :  yet  did  the  human  will 
of  Christ  know  temptation  of  the  flesh,  as  we  see  by  His 
temptation,  when  He  said,  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done;" 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  427 

that  is  to  say,  the  flesh  which  beareth  our  will  to  a  side,  away 
from  its  centre,  and  maketh  it  sinful,  which  is  a  will  in  bond- 
age, was  not  able  to  carry  Christ's  will  away,  though  nature 
shook,  and  shrunk,  and  quivered  again,  under  the  mighty 
power  which  held  it  unswerving  from  its  rectitude.  Ah  that 
word,  "  My  will,"  toucheth  me  to  the  heart,  shewing  me  that 
Christ  called  human  nature  by  the  name  I ! — and  that  His 
human  nature  would  have  swerved  Him  from  His  centre,  but 
for  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  abode  in  Him.  Now,  one  who 
will  receive  this, — and  they  are  not  many,  for  the  time  is 
come  when  they  shall  not  receive  sound  doctrine ; — one  who 
will  receive  this,  I  say,  can  understand  how  the  distinction  is 
made,  whereof  I  now  discourse,  between  the  redeemed  and 
the  unredeemed  creature.  The  ground  of  that  distinction  is 
not  in  the  creature,  but  in  the  Creator :  it  is  the  will  of  God 
to  save  whom  it  pleaseth  Him  to  save.  This  act  of  the 
Divine  will  being  absolute,  and  not  revealed,  is  properly  re- 
served with  the  Father,  who  representeth  and  retaineth  the 
absolute  attributes  of  the  Godhead  ;  and  thus  without  the 
doctrine  of  election,  you  have,  I  may  say,  no  absolute  God, 
but  only  a  revealed  and  manifested  God,  and  you  can,  there- 
fore, have  no  worship  of  the  invisible  Godhead.  I  mention 
this,  however,  only  by  the  way,  because  it  doth  not  properly 
belong  to  the  head  of  distinctions,  but  to  the  head  of  unions, 
which  will  come  hereafter  to  be  discoursed  of.  The  ground, 
therefore,  of  the  distinction  between  the  redeemed  and  un- 
redeemed of  creation  is  in  the  absolute  will  of  God ;  and  the 
origin  of  it  in  the  manifestation,  is  the  eternal  Son  taking 
unto  Himself  a  body, — which  body  is  the  beginning  and  the 
ending,  the  first  and  the  last  of  the  redeemed  creation. 
Therefore,  all  redemption,  which  in  the  purpose  dependeth 
from  the  goodness  of  the  Father,  doth  in  the  manifestation 
depend  from  the  humiliation  of  Christ.  It  was  an  act  of  His 
own  self-existent  personality  to  contract  that  infinite  circle  of 
His  being,  in  the  bosom  of  His  Father,  and  to  make  all  its 
acting  pass  through  that  concentric  and  limited  circle  of  the 
human  being  which  He  assumed.  And  for  this  act  never  to 
be  unacted;  for  what  God  doth,  He  doeth  for  ever;  the 
Father  bestowed  upon  His  human  nature  the  power  of  the 


42  8  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

Holy  Ghost,  or,  I  should  say,  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  His  inde- 
pendent personality,  did  condescend  to  inform  that  human 
nature,  and  never  to  act  towards  the  creatures  save  in  it  and 
through  it ;  so  that  the  great  operative  cause  in  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  creature  is  the  Holy  Spirit  taking  the  possession 
of  it,  and  sanctifying  or  separating  it  from  the  wicked  mass. 
Now,  with  respect  to  the  manner  in  which  this  is  effected,  it 
is  by  taking  it  out  from  the  waste,  digging  it  out  from  the 
miry  clay,  drawing  it  up  from  the  fearful  pit  of  this  our  fallen 
nature  ;  and  by  might  of  Divine  influence,  resisting  the  force 
of  corrupt  nature  upon  the  will  or  spirit  of  man,  which  hath 
made  it  move  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  unto  which  will 
the  Holy  Spirit  constraineth  it  to  return  back  and  be  agree- 
able. It  is  not  that  there  are  two  wills,  or  spirits,  in  the  re- 
newed man ;  but  that  his  will  is,  upon  the  one  hand,  acted  on 
by  the  powers  of  a  fallen  creation,  and  on  the  other  by  a 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  acting  under  the  risen  God-man. 
And  the  effect  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is,  to  unite  the  fallen 
creature  unto,  and  make  it  one  with,  the  body  of  Christ: 
so  that  the  end  of  redemption  is  the  gathering  out  for  sal- 
vation of  the  fixed  quantity  of  the  creation's  substance,  and 
joining  it  to  Christ's  body ;  and  when  this  is  completed, 
the  dispensation  of  election  is  completed,  and  the  Son  of 
God,  who  heretofore  appeared  one  substance  in  one  per- 
son, shall  hereafter  shew  His  glorious  human  substance 
in  many  persons ;  that  is,  in  all  the  elect  Church,  which 
shall  come  with  Him  in  the  power  and  glory  of  His  king- 
dom. But  for  Himself,  He  alone  partaking  of  the  Divine  na- 
ture, shall  stand  alone  and  eminent  above  them  all,  the  mani- 
fest Godhead  for  ever.  From  which  era,  of  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  elect,  and  the  bringing  in  of  the  kingdom,  shall 
begin  the  work  of  government,  wherein  the  manhood  shall 
manifest  itself  victorious  over  that  with  which  it  warred 
against ;  that  is,  flesh  and  blood,  and  sin,  and  Satan,  and 
death  ; — not  now  in  the  Christ  personal  and  individual  merely, 
but  in  the  Christ  plural;  that  is,  in  the  whole  redeemed 
Church.  But  further  into  this  we  may  not  enter  at  present. 
And  for  the  creatures  which  are  left  unredeemed  ;  all  these, 
being  raised  up  at  the  end  of  the  kingdom  in  that  form  which 


GOD  AND  THE  CREA  TURE.  429 

is  proper  to  endure  the  second  death,  and  with  them  the 
fallen  angels,  shall — in  punishment  of  that  resistance  which 
they  made  unto  the  truth,  and  of  that  preference  which  they 
gave  to  sin  over  righteousness  ;  and  for  their  denial  of  the 
law  of  God,  written  in  their  hearts  by  Christ  their  Creator  ; 
and  for  the  distinguishing  of  holiness  from  goodness,  and  of 
sin  from  weakness  ;  and  in  general  for  the  eternal  distinctions 
of  obedience  and  disobedience,  of  truth  and  falsehood,  of 
right  and  wrong,  and  in  order  to  lay  the  basis  of  government 
for  ever — be  cast  into  the  lake  that  burneth,  which  is  the 
second  death.  And  thus  we  have  these  four  distinct  things 
in  existence  :  First,  the  invisible  Godhead,  which  is  never 
changed  ;  secondly,  the  manifest  Godhead,  in  the  creature 
form  of  the  God-man  ;  thirdly,  the  redeemed  creatures,  stand- 
ing in  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  and  parts  of  that  one  sub- 
stance ;  fourthly,  the  unredeemed  forms  of  the  wicked  creation 
in  the  state  called  the  lake  that  burneth,  or  the  second  death. 
5.  Now,  the  distinctness  of  these  four  existences  must  be 
kept  for  ever  and  for  ever.  The  invisible  essence  of  the  God- 
head must  be  kept  distinct,  that  the  Creator  may  not  be 
confounded  with  the  visible  creature,  but  receive  its  homage, 
and  worship,  and  service  for  ever.  Secondly,  the  great  Head 
of  creation,  which  is  the  Christ,  must  be  kept  distinct  from  the 
redeemed  creatures,  in  order  that  He  may  be  the  representa- 
tive, the  brightness  of  the  glory,  and  the  express  image  of 
the  invisible  God,  and,  in  this  dignity,  maintain  for  ever  the 
order  and  subordination  of  the  redeemed  creatures,  ever  look- 
ing up  to  Him  as  the  face  of  God,  and  ever  listening  to  Him 
as  the  Word  of  God,  and  ever  honouring  Him  and  revering 
Him  as  the  way  for  the  creature  to  approach  unto  God,  and 
the  way  for  God  to  come  unto  the  creature.  Thirdly,  The 
redeemed  creation,  or  body  of  Christ  inhabited  by  the  Spirit, 
must  ever  be  kept  distinct  from  the  reprobate  creatures  lying 
in  the  penalty  of  the  second  death,  in  order  that  the  eternal 
distinction  between  holiness  and  unholiness,  between  blessed- 
ness and  misery,  between  God  and  sin,  may  be  for  ever 
established  in  the  sight  and  knowledge  of  all  creatures, 
which  are  yet  to  be  created  of  God  during  the  ages  of 
eternity.     Now,   eternal   distinctions,   which   enter  into   the 


4  30  THE  INC  A  RNA  TION : 

purpose  of  God,  must  have  an  eternal  basis  to  rest   upon. 
These   three    eternal    and   unchangeable    distinctions   must 
have  an  eternal  ground  in  the  being  of  God  himself;  and 
this  ground  is,  the   personalities   of  the  Godhead.     If  God 
is  one  personality,  then  there  never  can   be  a  creation  out 
of  God.     God  and  the  creature  will  be  for  ever  confounded 
and  worshipped,  and  service  of  the  Godhead  is  for  ever  lost. 
This   is  Unitarianism.      Again,  if  there  be  but  two  person- 
alities in  the  Godhead,  then  creation  might,  indeed,  be  sepa- 
rated from  God  under  the  Son  ;  but  it  would  be  as  a  proces- 
sion or  emanation  from  God,  and  having  in  it  of  the  essential 
being  of  God,  which  is  the  philosophy  and  religion  of  the 
Persian  sophists,  the  Brahmins,  and  others  of  the  East.     But 
by  three  personalities  in  the  essence  existing,  we  can,  as  hath 
been  set  forth  above,  bring  out  the  grand  problem  of  a  creation 
standing  under  God,  worshipping  God,  and  serving  God,  sepa- 
rate and  distinct  from  itself ;  which  I  take  to  be  the  great  end 
of  the  purpose  of  God,  and  the  great  problem  which  was  to 
be  resolved  ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity  ought  ever  to  be  held  as  the  great  fountainhead  of 
all  doctrine  whatever,  which  flows  from  it  like  the  crystalline 
streams  from  the  secret  recesses  of  the  pure  mountain  snow. 
And  however  much  men,  and  orthodox  men,  may  cavil  with 
us,  who  would  thus  seek  the  stream  of  life  in  its  fountain- 
head, — which  I  confess  is  a  perilous  and  dangerous  undertak- 
ing, not  by  every  head  to  be  attempted,  yet  when  Satan  hath 
found  his  way  thither,  and  poisoned  the  streams  of  all  the 
valleys, — it  is  most  needful,  and  cannot  be  dispensed  with, 
that  some  of  those  who  dwell   in   the   fertilised,   but  now 
poisoned,  valleys,  should  straightway,  for  the  sake  of  all  the 
families,  their  flocks  and  their  herds,  venture  forth,  though  it 
were  alone,  in  order  to  clear  out  the  poisoned  fountainheads. 
Or,  to  make  my  figure  more  exact,  if  a  company  of  wicked, 
diabolical  people  should  take  post  there,  for  the  very  end  of 
diffusing  poison  by  the  necessary  aliment  of  life,  it  is  most 
necessary  that  the  dales-men  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  plain 
should  keep  a  host  of  valiant  men,  strong  of  body  and  true  of 
heart,  ever  encamped  in  the  cold  and  rocky  upland,  to  dis- 
lodge these  murderers  and  destroyers  from  their  evil  haunts 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  431 

and  wicked  purposes.  For,  to  drop  all  figure,  I  do  maintain 
that  all  doctrine  whatsoever,  concerning  intercession,  atone- 
ment, and  mediation ;  concerning  the  creation,  the  fall,  and 
regeneration ;  is  truly,  and  verily,  an  indefensible  doctrine, 
save  by  the  presupposition  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity, 
which,  in  all  systems  of  sound  faith,  is  advanced  into  the  first 
and  highest  place.  Now,  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  hath  its 
practical  form,  only  in  the  maintenance  of  these  three  great  dis- 
tinctions, whereof  I  have  discoursed  above  : — (i.)  The  essence 
existing  in  the  Godhead  standing  under  the  Father ;  (2.)  the 
Head  Christ,  being  the  Godhead  manifested  in  the  person  of 
the  Son  ;  (3.)  the  redeemed  creatures,  being  the  subsistence  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  proceeding  through  the  humanity  of  the 
Son  ;  and  these  three  subsistencies  are  preserved  distinct,  no 
otherwise  than  by  the  distinctness  of  the  personalities  of  the 
Godhead,  while,  by  the  unity  of  the  substance  of  the  Godhead, 
they  are  united  in  relations  manifold,  which  I  shall  open  in 
the  next  head  :  and  the  whole  redeemed  creature,  thus  reca- 
pitulated into  Christ,  and  standing  in  everlasting  blessedness, 
being  only  a  part,  and  not  the  whole  of  the  creature  created, 
doth  stand  distinguished  from  mere  creature,  which  remaineth 
in  the  condition  of  the  second  death,  concerning  which  condi- 
tion I  can  say  no  more ;  and  I  think  no  more  is  revealed  than 
this,  that  it  is  also  eternal  and  unchangeable. 

And  here  I  conclude  these  heads  and  hints  of  deep  dis- 
course ;  to  the  all-important  doctrine  of  which  I  have  nothing 
to  add,  except  to  open,  in  another  head,  the  unions  in  three 
distinctions ;  and  I  pray  you  to  look  upon  the  incarnation  as 
chiefly  valuable,  or  I  should  rather  say  invaluable,  not  for  the 
sake  of  atonement,  which  is  a  mere  part  of  its  infinite  fruitful- 
ness,  but  for  the  sake  of  manifesting  the  existence  of  the  God- 
head, as  outward  from  the  creature,  and  never  to  be  mingled 
with  it,  and  the  subsistence  of  the  Godhead  in  three  persons, 
under  whose  separate  personality  the  great  distinctions  neces- 
sary to  worship,  to  redemption,  and  to  subjection,  together 
with  the  union  in  those  distinctions,  might  be  clearly  and  for 
ever  fixed.  I  have  opened  to  you  a  great  mystery :  see  ye 
receive  it,  and  enter  into  it,  and  be  no  more  children  tossed 
about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine,  and  cunning  slight  of  men. 


432  THE  INCARNATION: 

which  lie  in  wait  to  deceive,  but,  being  rooted  in  truth  and  in 
love,  may  grow  up  into  Him  which  is  the  Head,  God  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever.     Amen. 

HI.  We  have  shewn  out  under  the  two  preceding  heads, 
the  three  personalities  in  the  Godhead,  and  the  three  great 
distinctions  preserved  thereby,  for  ever  and  ever  in  creation ; 
namely,  first,  the  distinction  between  the  invisible  Creator 
and  the  visible  creature  ;  secondly,  between  the  redeemed  and 
the  unredeemed  parts  of  the  creatures ;  and  thirdly,  between 
the  redeemed  creature  and  Christ  its  Head.  We  have  shewn, 
also,  that  these  distinctions  come  to  pass  and  are  maintained 
through  the  three  separate  personalities  in  the  Godhead ;  the 
invisible  and  infinite  Godhead,  standing  under  the  personality 
of  the  Father ;  the  visible  and  manifest  Godhead  standing 
under  the  person  of  the  Son  :  the  redeemed  creatures  consist- 
ing in,  and  standing  under,  the  person  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  three  ever  distinct  and  never  to  be  confounded  per- 
sonalities, of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  keeping  distinct- 
ness between  these  three  existencies,  does  leave  a  fourth,  or 
the  creature  in  its  fallen  state,  or  rather  in  the  state  of  the 
second  death,  remaining  as  the  great  monument  of  what  the 
creature  is,  when  separated  from  the  Godhead,  and  not  stand- 
ing under  the  personalities  thereof  And  we  come  now  to 
open  another  head  of  conclusions,  without  which  the  mystery 
is  not  explained  ;  namely,  the  essential  unions  which  coexist 
with  these  distinctions  :  for  the  end  of  creation  is  not  attained, 
merely  by  separating  the  creature  from  the  Creator,  but  by 
the  securing  of  its  worship  and  service,  in  that  estate  of  sepa- 
rateness ;  and  we  are  now  to  shew  how  this  constitution  in 
Christ  doth  attain  this  the  ultimate  end  of  creation,  by  secur- 
ing the  most  certain  and  complete  obedience  and  worship 
from  the  creature  towards  the  Creator  ;  together  with  the  con- 
tinual descent  of  blessing  and  goodness  from  the  Creator  unto 
the  creature.  And  here  we  shall  begin  at  the  fountainhead 
of  being,  which  is  the  invisible  Godhead,  and  descend  down- 
wards unto  the  manifested  Godhead,  and  down  again  to  the 
Godhead  inhabiting  the  redeemed  creature,  till  we  arrive  at 
the  waste  ocean  of  the  unredeemed  creatures. 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  433 

I.  Concerning  the  Godhead  in  its  unrevealed  and  incom- 
prehensible being,  we  can  only  speak  from  the  knowledge 
which  we  have  from  the  Godhead  manifested  in  Christ.  Christ 
always  referreth  back  to  the  invisible  Father,  and  presents  the 
great  end  and  object  of  His  coming  to  the  world,  as  being  to 
manifest  the  Father,  Avhom  no  one  at  any  time  hath  seen,  or 
can  see.  Whenever  the  people  were  disposed  to  rest  in  Christ 
as  the  ultimate  end  of  power  and  Divinity,  He  always  referred 
them  to  a  higher  source  than  Himself,  saying,  "  Ye  cannot 
come  unto  me,  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw 
you.  My  Father  is  greater  than  I."  And  what  He  did  by 
words,  when  needs  was, — which,  alas !  occurred  too  seldom, 
because  they  were  little  disposed  to  rest  in  His  manifest  God- 
head,— He  did  also  continually  by  His  acts,  praying  unto  the 
Father  for  His  help ;  and  even  when,  as  in  the  case  of  Lazarus, 
He  was  sure  of  that  help,  doing  so  that  the  people  might 
observe  it.  Christ's  whole  life  is  an  act  of  obedience  and  of 
worship,  offered  unto  the  invisible  Godhead,  and  yet  was  Christ 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  in  a  bodily  form.  To  the  same 
end  of  carrying  up  the  creatures  beyond  Himself,  into  the 
invisible  and  incomprehensible  Godhead,  Christ  continually 
declared,  that  He  did  not  His  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the 
Father  which  sent  Him  ;  that  He  spoke  not  of  Himself  the 
words  which  He  spake,  and  that  His  Father  did  the  works 
which  He  did.  Was  it  then,  that  the  incomprehensible  God- 
head of  the  Father  was  dwelling  in  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ, 
who  said.  He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father  .''  No  : 
the  Holy  Ghost  dwelt  in  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and,  inso- 
much as  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  and  is 
one  substance  with  the  Father,  and  speaketh  and  acteth  only 
as  He  heareththe  Father  speak  and  seeth  Him  act,  insomuch 
doth  the  Father  dwell  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  But  this  is 
not  the  mystery  of  the  Father's  Godhead,  to  which  Christ 
maketh  such  continual  reference.  The  mystery  of  the  Father's 
Godhead,  which  Christ  came  forth  to  manifest,  is  this.  That 
in  the  Father,  who  is  the  fountain  of  the  Godhead,  generating 
the  Son,  and  through  and  with  Him  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  hid 
and  contained  that  incommunicable  and  inexhaustible  fulness 
which  no  creature  can  receive  or  apprehend  ;  but  which  every 
VOL.  V,  2  E 


434  THE  INCARNATION: 

creature  must  worship  and  adore.  The  Father,  of  whom  Christ 
speaketh  so  constantly,  is  not  any  manifestation  of  God,  but 
God  unmanifested  ;  and  therefore  He  is  so  often  styled  God. 
The  Godhead,  purposing  to  communicate  unto  the  creatures 
so  much  of  the  goodness  and  glory  of  His  being  as  the  crea- 
tures could  receive,  did  accomplish  this  gracious  end  by  the 
incarnation  of  the  Son,  and  the  inhabitation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whose  necessary  limitation  of  being,  for  this  end,  made 
it  necessary  that  the  infinite  Godhead  should  stand  presented 
under  the  unrevealed  person  of  the  Father.  It  could  not  stand 
under  the  person  of  the  Son,  who,  in  becoming  manifest,  be- 
comes limited  and  comprehensible,  and  therefore  not  fit  to 
represent  the  unlimited  and  incomprehensible.  Neither  could 
the  infinite  Godhead  stand  under  the  person  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  for  the  same  reason ;  and,  consequently,  to  the  end 
there  might  be  an  Infinite  and  Incomprehensible  to  be  wor- 
shipped through  the  finite  and  comprehensible,  it  standeth 
under  the  person  of  the  Father,  in  whom  the  infinite  Godhead 
of  the  Son  and  the  infinite  Godhead  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
worshipped,  as  well  as  the  infinite  Godhead  of  the  Father ; 
but  all  standing  under  the  person  of  the  Father,  because  of 
the  offices  in  the  visible,  which  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
had  undertaken,  for  bringing  into  effect  the  Christ  constitu- 
tion, or  eternal  purpose  of  God. 

Now,  the  question  is,  how  the  communication  of  the  visible 
creature,  with  the  invisible,  ineffable,  incomprehensible  Crea- 
tor, shall  be  carried  on  :  how  the  interchange  of  grace  and 
goodness,  yea,  of  life  and  being,  on  the  one  hand  ;  and  on 
the  other,  thanksgiving,  and  praise,  and  service,  and  worship, 
shall  surely  take  place  ?  This  is  accomplished  by  the  proces- 
sion of  the  Son  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  to  take  a  crea- 
ture form,  through  which  to  speak  and  act  the  purposes  of 
God.  To  do  which  the  Son  is  the  proper  Person,  not  only  as 
being  of  one  substance  with  the  Father,  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  also  is  ;  but  likewise,  as  being  the  inhabiter  of  the 
Father's  bosom,  from  all  eternity,  His  only-begotten  Son,  the 
brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of 
His  person.  The  ground  of  His  propriety  to  be  Head  of 
the  creatures  is,  that  He  is  nearest  unto  the  Father,  in  the 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  435 

necessary  order  of  the  Divine  nature,  being   by   necessary 
generation,  from  all  eternity,  the  expression  of  the  Father's 
fulness  ;  and  therefore  it  is  said  of  the  Son,  what  is  not  said 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  No  one  knoweth  the  Father  but  the 
Sor^  and  he  to  whom  the  Son  shall  reveal  him."     But  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  it  is  said,  "He  shall  take  of  the  things  of  mine, 
and  will  shew  them   unto  you."     The  things  of  the   Holy 
Ghost  are  first  things  of  the  Son.     The  Father,  therefore,  who 
in  the  necessary  act  of  generation  hath  poured  His  fulness 
into  tht  Son,  doth,  by  a  natural  consequence,  when  the  time 
Cometh  ':o  create  all  things,  perform  this  act  of  the  Godhead 
by  the  Son,  into  whom  all  fulness  of  the  Godhead  is  poured  ; 
and   whtn  the  time  comes,  to  manifest  unto  the  creatures 
whateverof  the  Godhead  the  creatures  shall  or  can  behold, 
the  same  :ongruity,  or  I  may  say  necessity,  requireth  it  to  be 
done  thxugh  the  Person  of  the  Son  ;  and  thus  creation,  in 
the  perfected  form  of  redemption,  cometh  to  be  a  simple 
opening  )f  the  mystery  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son,  so  far 
as  the  creatures  are  able  to  receive  it.     And  by  what  assur- 
ance, nec'ssary  and  inviolable,  the  Son  is  observant  of,  affec- 
tionate to  one  with  the  Father,  by  that  same  assurance  doth 
the  redeei  ed  creatures,  standing  in  the  Son,  become  loving, 
reverent,  aid  obedient,  unto  the  invisible  Godhead  ;  so  that  I 
may  say,  'lat  most  perfect  relation,  most  loving,  most  indis- 
soluble, wlch  from  eternity,  and  through  eternity,  subsisteth 
between  tb  Father  and  the  Son,  is  propagated  unto  the 
creatures  trough  their  standing  in  the  Son.     They  become 
not  a  part  c  the  Godhead  ;  but  yet  they  are  one  with  Christ, 
and  with  on  another,  as  Christ  is  one  with  the  Father ;  and 
there  can  nver  fail  of  worship,  there  can  never  fail  of  love, 
there  can  neer  fail  of  obedience,  there  can  never  fail  of  bless- 
ing in  the  reeemed  creature  towards  God,  unless  these  were 
to  fail  in  the5on  towards  the  Father.     And  in  this  way  it  is 
that  the  creaire,  under  Christ,  is  ever  preserved  in  its  fealty, 
allegiance,   ad    subserviency   unto   the   invisible   Godhead, 
through  its  b-ng  headed  up  in,  and  bound  unto  Christ.     And 
so  much  havil  to  say  with  respect  to  the  connexion  in  dis- 
tinction substing  between    the   creature  and  the  Creator, 
through  the  institution  in   Christ  ;  Avhich  will  appear  still 


436  THE  INCARNATION: 

more  distinctly  when  we  come  to  consider,  in  the  next  place, 
the  way  in  which  the  connexion  between  the  Son  and  the  re- 
deemed creatures  is  maintained. 

2.  This  ariseth  out  of  the  union  of  the  two  natures  in  Chnst, 
which  is  not  the  union  of  two  persons,  as  husband  and  wife, 
which  by  God  are  regarded  as  one ;  nor  as  parent  and  Ciiild, 
which  by  God,  in  baptism,  are  likewise  regarded  as  one;  but 
it  is  the  union  of  two  natures  in  one  person,  and  thst  the 
person,  the  self-existing  person,  of  the  eternal  and  only- 
begotten  Son  of  God.  The  personality  of  the  Second  Person 
of  the  Godhead  is  an  eternal  and  necessary,  not  an  apparent 
and  temporary  truth.  The  Son  is  a  person  because  God  is; 
and  the  same  also  say  I  of  the  personality  of  the  Hoy  Ghost. 
This  personality  of  Christ  acted  in  creation,  as  will  as  in 
redemption  ;  but  in  creation  it  was  not  united  untothe  crea- 
ture as  it  became  united  in  redemption  :  and  yei,  even  in 
creation,  the  Son,  though  invisible,  and  acting  outsicfe  of  the 
creature,  did  nevertheless  act  under  the  conditions  of  tie  finite, 
and  not  under  the  absoluteness  of  the  infinite  ;  that  is  to  say, 
He  presupposed  unto  Himself  a  form,  though  not  yi  created, 
but  only  purposed,  in  the  Creator's  counsel ;  and  his  form, 
under  which  the  world  was  created,  was  the  form  ofthe  risen 
God-man,  of  the  Lamb  slain  and  living  still,  of  tl^  first  be- 
gotten from  the  dead.  Under  the  condition  of  th^  creature 
form,  though  not  yet  in  the  reality  of  it,  did  the  irifnite  God- 
head, in  the  person  of  the  Son,  contract  and  bouiH  itself  for 
the  purposes  of  creation.  He  created,  as  Christ  all  things 
visible  and  invisible,  as  is  set  forth  in  the  first  ch|pter  of  the 
Colossians.  But  withal  His  own  body  was  not  ^t  created  ; 
created  indeed  in  substance  it  was  in  the  first  acti)f  creation, 
but  in  living  form  not  yet  quickened  till  the  ,loly  Ghost 
came  upon  the  virgin,  and  the  power  of  the  ,ftighest  did 
overshadow  her.  But  when  the  fulness  of  the  ime  for  this 
great  act  of  the  Father,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  -v^s  come,  the 
time  was  come  for  the  Son,  or  the  Godhead  in  pe  person  of 
the  Son,  to  appear  in  that  form  which  from  eterity  had  been 
resolved  upon,  and  from  creation  had  been  assfned,  but  till 
now  was  not  effected,  though  shadowed  forthfrom  the  be- 
ginning in  the  person  of  Adam,  who  is  on  thikccount,  and 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  437 

on  no  other,  said  to  have  been  created  in  the  image  of  God. 
Now,  by  assuming  into  Himself  the  human  nature,  and  be- 
coming the  Christ  of  God,  the  personality  of  the  Son  is  still 
the  same :  it  is  the  eternal,  only-begotten  Son  of  God,  who 
speaketh,  who  heareth,  who  acteth,  who  suffereth,  and  yet  the 
Divine  nature  is  ever  distinct,  and  never  to  be  confounded 
with  the  human  nature.  So  that  it  shall  not  be  possible  to 
say  that  the  Divine  nature  suffereth  any  change,  which  is  a 
great  mystery,  no  doubt,  but  yet  a  great  truth,  both  necessary 
to  be  known  and  to  be  believed.  Nor  do  I  think  that  it  is 
safe  to  remain  in  ignorance  of  such  a  truth,  and  therefore  I 
represent  it  unto  you  thus :  That  the  words,  and  acts,  and 
sufferings  of  Christ,  are  not  to  be  called  of  the  Divine  nature 
only,  nor  of  the  human  nature  only,  but  of  the  person  Christ, 
God-man  ;  one  person,  though  two  natures. 

And  here  I  must,  though  reluctantly,  disagree  with  the  method 
in  which  many  of  the  orthodox  fathers,  and  reformers,  and  doc- 
tors, and  ministers,  are  wont  to  speak,  as  if  some  actions  of 
Christ  were  actions  done  in  the  Godhead  only,  and  some  others 
were  actions  done  in  the  manhood  only.  And  right  glad  am 
I  that  this,  though  current  in  the  schools,  and  in  sermons, 
hath  not  found  its  way  into  any  of  the  standards  of  the  Church ; 
for  if  this  way  of  speaking  were  correct,  it  would  lead  neces- 
sarily to  the  making  of  two  persons  in  Christ,  or  else  of  two 
ascendancies'which  in  succession  overrule  His  person,  like  the 
ascendancies  of  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  in  the  person  of  a 
man, — which  cannot  be  predicated  of  a  Divine  person,  who 
overruleth,  and  hath  the  ascendant,  and  is  not  overruled  or 
acted  upon  by  an  ascendancy.  It  is,  moreover,  a  false  idea 
concerning  the  Divine  nature,  to  speak  as  if  it  could  do  a  finite 
action,  let  that  be  ever  so  stupendous,  even  as  creation  itself, 
without  assuming  a  finite  form.  It  is,  moreover,  to  subvert 
the  whole  purpose  of  the  Creator,  and  confidence  of  the  crea- 
ture, to  say  that  the  personality  of  the  Son  may  ever  go  into 
action  separate  from,  or  by  suspension  of,  the  human  nature. 
If  the  human  nature  of  Christ  were  thus  ever,  though  only 
once,  put  sub  silentio,  it  might  be  again  and  again,  and  for 
ever,  and  so  the  whole  mystery  of  a  manifest  Godhead  is 
defeated.     I   know  from  what  this  mode  of  speaking  hath 


43S  THE  INCARNATION. 


1 


arisen,  even  from  a  desire  to  find  in  Christ's  life  that  evident 
manifestation  of  Godhead  which  Christ  himself  declareth  that 
it  contained  not,  when  He  said  unto  Peter,  "  Flesh  and  blood 
'hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  It  is  also  a  well-meant  attempt  to  preserve  the  God- 
head of  Christ  impassive,  by  giving  to  it  the  acts  of  power, 
and  to  the  manhood  the  acts  of  suffering.  But  really,  though 
well-meant  in  this  respect,  it  doth  but  save  the  flimsiest  ap- 
pearance :  for  in  deed,  and  in  truth,  it  is  to  the  Godhead  as 
disproportionate  and  unfit  to  suffer  the  pity  and  compassion 
of  the  mind  which  moveth  to  the  healing  of  the  sick,  or  the 
casting  out  of  devils,  as  it  is  to  suffer  and  abide  the  scourg- 
ings  and  buffetings  of  men  ;  both  being  proper  only  to  man- 
hood, and  not  predicable  of  Godhead,  except  under  a  figure. 

This  mode  of  speaking,  concerning  the  life  of  Christ,  as 
being  part  all  Godhead  and  part  all  manhood,  is  not  only 
attended  with  these  evil  effects,  but  hath  this  moreover  to 
answer  for,  that,  first  of  all,  it  doth  defeat  the  manifestation 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His  manhood,  which  I  affirm  hath  been 
almost  forgotten  to  be  a  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  at  all ;  and 
from  this  is  chiefly  derived  that  aimlessness,  fancifulness,  idle- 
ness, and  unprofitableness  with  which  men  speak  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  altogether.  And  besides  this,  it  hath  destroyed  Christ's 
life  from  being  the  great  type,  both  as  respecteth  suffering, 
and  as  respecteth  power,  of  what  every  Christian's  life,  under 
the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  ought  to  be :  for  I  believe, 
that  we  cast  not  devils  out,  and  heal  not  the  sick,  and  do  not 
the  other  parts  of  Christ's  life,  simply  and  truly  because  we 
have  not  faith,  and  are  responsible  unto  Christ's  challenge 
and  rebuke,  with  which  He  chid  His  disciples  when  they  fell 
short  of  their  privilege  to  cast  devils  out,  saying  unto  them, 
"  O  ye  faithless  generation,  how  long  shall  I  bear  with  you  .-'" 
All  these  evils,  I  say,  come  of  this  false  way  of  representing 
the  activity  of  the  two  natures  of  Christ ;  and  therefore  it  is 
not,  as  it  were,  a  matter  of  ingenious  speculation,  but  grave 
reformation  of  error,  when  I  undertake  a  little  to  lay  open 
the  distinctness  of  the  nature  of  Christ  in  the  unity  of  person, 
and  that  in  every  word,  action,  and  suffering  of  the  same. 

As  I  said,  the  person  acting  and  suffering  is  the  eternal  and 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  439 

unchangeable  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead.  He  is  the  / 
who  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  from  all  eternity ;  and 
in  every  action  He  is  conscious  God.  When  He  saith,  "  I 
will,"  it  is  the  Godhead  that  willeth.  From  the  infinite  God- 
head, therefore,  is  the  origin  of  every  volition  and  action  of 
Christ.  The  fountain  is  there,  in  the  infinite.  And  how  pro- 
ceedeth  it  into  the  finite  .-'  It  proceedeth  into  the  finite  by  an 
act  of  self-humiliation  and  self-restriction,  which  is  the  pecu- 
liar, proper,  and  boundless  condescension  of  the  Son  in  His 
own  self-existent  personality.  But  no  eye  beholdeth  it,  no 
finite  mind  comprehendeth  it,  no  word  can  utter  it ;  the  great- 
ness of  this  grace  of  self-humiliation  on  the  part  of  the  Son  is 
known  unto  the  Father  only,  whose  bosom  alone  contained 
that  fulness  which  is  contracted  into  manhood's  narrow  limits. 
This  Divine  act  of  self-contraction  is  the  Godhead  part  of 
every  act  of  Christ.  It  is  the  continuance,  it  is  the  abiding 
and  the  eternal  perpetuity  of  that  one  resolve  which  is  written 
in  the  book,  "  Lo  !  I  come  ;  a  body  hast  thou  prepared  for 
me."  This  is  the  nature  of  God  ;  what  He  doth,  to  do  for 
ever  ;  He  doth  not  exist  in  time.  Time  measureth  Him  nob 
as  space  comprehendeth  Him  not.  That  purpose  of  the  Son, 
to  humble  Himself  into  manhood,  did  not  cast  His  Godhead 
away.  He  did  not  become,  in  person,  a  mere  man.  He  con- 
tinued to  be  in  person  the  same  Son  of  God,  after  as  before 
He  made  this  dedication  of  Himself  unto  His  Father's  glory, 
and  unto  the  creature's  good.  He  is  God  still,  but  God  thus 
self-determined  to  act  and  suffer  the  man.  He  cannot  cease 
to  be  Son  of  God,  nor  can  He  cease  from  His  own  willingness 
to  become  Son  of  man  ;  and  thus  He  is  always  to  be  by  these 
words  defined.  Son  of  God  willing  to  become  Son  of  man. 
The  Divine  nature,  therefore,  ever  acts,  and  it  ever  finishes 
with  acting,  when  the  Son  of  man  begins  to  act.  It  is  the 
Son  of  man,  whose  action  is  seen,  felt,  reported,  discoursed  of, 
imitated,  and  delighted  in  by  the  creatures.  The  Son  of  man 
only  suffers,  and  the  Son  of  man  only  acts  with  power.  His 
actions,  and  His  words,  are  like  His  countenance,  such  as  man's 
are  ;  such  as  every  man's,  who  is  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
ought  to  be ;  and  such,  I  believe,  as  mankind's  will  be,  in  the 
days  of  the  kingdom.     But,  while  thus  I  speak,  I  put  no  man 


440  THE  INCARNATION: 

into  the  level  of  Christ ;  for  that  action  of  His  self-contracting 
power,  which  belongeth  to  Him  as  a  Divine  and  self-existent 
person,  which  is  the  action,  and  the  only  action,  of  the  God- 
head, and  yet  is  present  in  all  His  actings,  and  yet  not  mingled 
with  the  human  parts  and  appurtenances  of  them,  is  that  to 
which  no  man  may  aspire.  Because  the  sage  hath,  by  his 
self-contracting  power,  brought  himself  to  speak  and  act  with 
the  children  of  the  nursery,  the  sage  is  not  therefore  to  be 
equalled  with  the  child,  nor  is  the  child  to  presume  himself  a 
sage.  Yet  is  the  sage,  though  apparently  but  a  child,  a  sage 
still ;  and  by  far  the  noblest  part  of  his  action  is  hidden  in 
that  previous  self-contraction  of  his  powers  whereof  the  chil- 
dren have  no  consciousness  at  all. 

When  thus  explained  in  the  way  in  which  alone  I  believe 
it  is  capable  of  being  explained,  how  small  a  matter  doth  that 
seem  upon  which  so  much  stress  is  laid  by  the  ignorant,  who 
will  allow  Christ  readily  enough  to  descend  to  the  unfallen, 
but  not  to  the  fallen  state  of  the  creature ;  for  the  merit  and 
the  greatness  of  the  act  consisteth  not  so  much  in  the  nature 
of  that  finite  form  which  He  assumed,  but  in  the  assumption 
of  a  finite  form ;  whether  that  finite  form  should  be  of  the 
angel,  or  of  the  archangel,  or  of  the  man,  hath  little  to  do,  or 
rather  nothing  to  do,  with  the  stupendous  magnitude  of  the 
love,  and  condescension,  and  humiliation.  It  is  not  the 
bounds  of  the  finite  being,  but  it  is  the  becoming  finite  in 
which  the  merit  consisteth ;  and  it  betrayeth  a  degree  of 
ignorance  unpardonable  in  the  Christian,  to  make  a  hesita- 
tion, after  consenting  to  His  becoming  man,  that  He  should 
become  man  in  the  fallen  state.  If,  indeed,  it  brought  Him 
into  sin,  then  the  whole  face  of  the  question  were  altered. 
But  if  it  bring  Him  only  into  the  controversy  with  sin,  that 
He  may  overcome  sin  ;  and  with  the  devil,  that  He  may 
bruise  the  devil's  head  ;  with  fallen  man,  that  He  may  redeem 
him  ;  then,  while  it  is  everything  to  us  that  it  should  be  so, 
indeed  it  is  an  exceedingly  small  addition,  I  may  say  nothing 
at  all,  to  Him  that,  after  taking  the  infinite  descent  of  being 
a  creature.  He  should  step  a  hair's-breadth  further,  and  take 
up  the  creature  in  its  fallen  state.  I  make  this  "remark,  not 
to  go  back  upon  a  thing  which  I  have  proved,  nor  yet  to 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  441 

doubt  the  validity  of  the  proof,  but  only  to  shew  how  little 
those  who  stumble  here  apprehend  of  the  infinite  grace 
which  there  is  in  the  eternal  Son  of  God  taking  up  into  the 
same  personality  with  Himself  the  nature  of  the  creature, 
and  consenting,  through  the  finite  powers  of  the  same,  to 
shew  forth  unto  the  creatures  what  the  creatures  can  com- 
prehend, on  all  sides,  of  the  infinite  being  and  perfections  of 
the  invisible  Godhead. 

3.  Another  of  the  eternal  distinctions  which  we  laid  down 
in  our  former  head  of  discourse,  is  the  distinction  between 
the  redeemed  creatures  inhabited  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
their  head  standing  in  the  person  of  the  Son.  And  I  now 
proceed  to  shew  how  the  union  is  maintained  in  this  distinc- 
tion ;  for  union  in  distinctness  is  the  key  of  the  whole  mys- 
tery. The  redeemed  creatures  are  only  members  of  the  body 
of  Christ.  They  live,  not  by  holding  of  Adam,  by  which 
tenure  they  inherit  death  ;  but  they  live  by  holding  of  Christ, 
in  whom  the  life  was  manifested,  and  from  whom  the  life 
proceedeth.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  eternal  indwelling  life  of 
the  creature  ;  and  no  creature  hath  eternal  life  but  through 
the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now,  it  is  Christ's  to  bap- 
tize with  the  Holy  Ghost :  "  He  shall  baptize  you  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire:"  and  to  shew  us  that  it  is  from 
the  body  of  Christ,  even  His  human  nature,  that  this  bap- 
tism with  eternal  life  proceedeth,  we  have  His  body  pre- 
sented unto  us  as  our  only  nourishment,  in  the  Holy 
Supper ; — just  as,  in  natural  life,  the  child  sucketh  milk 
from  the  breast  of  her  that  bare  him,  and  liveth  upon 
her  body.  Seeing,  then,  that  all  life,  eternal  and  immor- 
tal, proceedeth  from,  and  feedeth  on,  the  body  of  Christ, 
we  speak  nothing  but  the  truth  when  we  say  that  all 
the  redeemed  creatures  are  but  parts  of  His  human  sub- 
stance, consubstantial  with  Him  as  pertaineth  to  His  man- 
hood, as  He  is  consubstantial  with  the  Father  as  pertaineth 
to  His  Godhead.  Now,  no  union  is  so  close  as  this  between 
the  manhood  of  Christ  and  the  redeemed  creature.  Husband 
and  wife,  who  heretofore  were  one,  are  now  become  twain, 
separated  ofttimes  by  every  interest,  and  every  passion, 
though  by  the  Church,  and  by  the  law,  and  before  the  Lord, 


442  THE  INCARNATION : 

as  one  regarded.  The  members  of  the  body  also  are  not  so 
placed  in  union  with  each  other,  but  that  it  is  in  the  power  of 
every  disease  and  of  every  accident  to  part  them  asunder. 
Nor  is  the  soul  so  fast  confederate  with  the  body,  but  that  death 
can  separate  them  more  widely  than  imagination  can  conceive. 
But  this  union,  which  Christ  to  the  believer  holdeth,  hath  in 
it  that  strength  and  faithfulness,  which  neither  time,  nor  eter- 
nity, nor  sin,  nor  death,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor 
powers,  can  part  asunder.  And  though  I  speak  of  this  as 
union  with  His  human  nature  only,  it  is  not  less  union  to  the 
Person  of  the  eternal  Son,  which  now  includeth  and  embraceth 
the  human  nature,  with  the  same  assurance  and  possession 
with  which  it  embraceth  the  nature  Divine.  But,  while  thus 
I  speak,  I  would  not  be  understood  to  mean  that  Christ's 
person,  because  it  embraceth  the  human  nature,  doth  also 
embrace  His  people.  This  were  to  make  the  union  to  swal- 
low up  and  destroy  the  distinction  :  and  it  were,  moreover,  to 
confuse  the  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost  with  the  personal- 
ity of  the  Son.  Christ,  in  His  Person,  as  much  transcendeth 
the  person  of  any  of  His  members,  as  God  transcendeth  man  ; 
and  each  of  His  members,  by  how  much  they  feel  the  close- 
ness of  their  union  unto  Christ,  by  His  humanity,  with  the 
inseparable  security  derived  thence,  do  by  so  much  also 
honour  that  condescension  of  His,  that  love  of  His,  that  un- 
dertaking of  His,  whereby  He  did  purchase  them,  and  re- 
deem them  from  their  bondage  and  misery,  from  their  state 
of  being  sold  under  sin,  into  the  glorious  and  blessed  stand- 
ing of  grace  which  they  now  enjoy.  All  their  delight,  all 
their  power,  goes  to  His  account,  from  whom  it  flowed  of  free 
grace  unto  them,  and  thus,  between  the  redeemed  creatures, 
and  Christ  their  Head,  there  is  established  a  relation  of  union, 
which  by  its  union  produceth  all  love,  joy,  and  blessedness  ; 
while  there  is  preserved  a  relation  of  distinctness,  which 
bringeth  unto  Him  all  royal  and  priestly  dignity,  all  Divine 
majesty  and  monarchical  power,  all  right  of  possession,  all 
right  of  command,  and  worketh  in  us  all  deference,  respect, 
dependence,  security,  protection,  and  every  other  feeling 
which  is  proper  in  a  creature  towards  its  Creator,  who,  for 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  443 

love  of  it,  hath  condescended  to  live  and  move,  and  have  His 
being  in  a  creature  form. 

While  I  thus  draw  out  the  union  in  distinction,  which  is 
established  between  the  redeemed  creatures  and  their  Divine 
Head,  it  is  necessary  to  divide  this  from  the  worship  of 
the  invisible  Godhead,  which  it  is  the  very  end  of  Christ's 
manifestation  to  promote.  Christ,  or  the  Son  manifest- 
ing the  Godhead  in  creature  form,  hath  all  that  love,  hath 
all  that  reverence  and  homage,  whereof  I  have  discoursed  ; 
while  at  the  same  time  the  invisible  Godhead,  standing 
in  the  Person  of  the  Father,  as  the  visible  doth  in  the 
Person  of  the  Son,  hath  from  the  creatures  that  which  is 
truly  and  really  called  worship.  I  do  not  mean  that  the 
Father  only  is  worshipped  ;  but  that  the  Godhead  in  the  in- 
visible and  unrevealed  essence  of  it,  and  not  the  Godhead  in 
the  visible  and  creature  form,  is  the  proper  object  of  what  is 
truly  called  worship.  . 

4.  The  third  union  in  distinction  is  the  union  of  the  mem- 
bers of  Christ  with  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  and  with  one 
another  through  the  Holy  Ghost;  whereof  the  perfectness 
cannot  be  expressed  by  any  similitude.  That  employed  in 
Scripture  is,  being  one  with  Christ,  and  with  one  another,  as 
Christ  is  one  with  the  Father ; — a  union  this  which  nothing 
can  part  ;  "  neither  life  nor  death,  nor  things  present,  nor 
things  to  come,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  height,  nor 
depth,  nor  any  other  creature."  All  other  unions  can  be 
separated.  The  union  between  the  vine  and  its  branches  can 
be  separated  by  the  knife  of  the  husbandman.  The  union 
between  the  members  and  the  body  can  be  separated  by 
diseases  and  accidents  manifold,  and  by  death  is  utterly  dis- 
solved :  the  union  between  husband  and  wife,  wickedness  doth 
dissolve;  and  death  dissolveth  the  union  between  the  soul 
and  the  body;  but  the  union  which  we  have  with  Christ, 
through  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  eternal  life  which  nothing  can 
ever  dissolve,  "  Because  He  lives,  we  live  also  :"  because  He 
hath  overcome  all  the  powers  of  dissolution,  we  shall  over- 
come them  also.  And  not  only  doth  Christ's  life  in  glory, 
and  his  Divine  gift  of  quickening  immortal  life,  secure  to  us 


444  THE  INCARNA  TION : 

this  continual  and  uninterrupted  fellowship  with  Himself ;  but 
it  bringeth  into  one  those  who  had  been  parted  upon  the  earth 
by  time  and  place,  gathering  them  into  one  church,  into  one 
body,  into  one  spouse,  into  one  city,  out  of  all  kindreds  and 
nations  and  tongues,  against  the  day  of  His  appearing,  recall- 
ing the  body  from  its  dust-dissolved  state,  and  joining  it  in 
immortal  glory  unto  the  soul,  in  a  union  never  again  to  be 
divided,  joining  also  the  saints  unto  the  inheritance  and  pos- 
session from  which  they  had  been  separated  by  the  interposi- 
tion of  Satan  ; — all  broken  families  of  the  faithful  reuniting, 
all  interrupted  loves  and  friendships  of  the  faithful  harmoni- 
ously reconciling,  and  bringing  to  pass  such  fellowship  and 
unity  of  love  as  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  the  heart 
of  man  conceived.  And  how  is  all  this  procured  ?  It  is  pro- 
cured by  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  one,  and  which,  proceeding 
from  the  body  of  Christ,  doth  gather  into  one  all  the  election 
of  God  ;  who,  thenceforth,  grow  into  the  same  image  with 
Christ,  from  glory  to  glory,  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  how 
should  the  Holy  Spirit  be  able  to  quicken  in  us,  who  are  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins,  that  same  life  of  godliness  and  image 
of  perfection  which  was  in  Jesus  Christ .-'  Because,  I  answer, 
this  is  the  very  end  of  His  proceeding  from  Christ,  unto 
whom  all  power  is  given,  in  order  to  beget  sons  unto  God  ; 
and  not  only  to  beget  sons  unto  God,  but  likewise  sons  of 
God,  according  as  it  is  written,  "  Behold !  what  manner  of 
love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be 
called  the  sons  of  God;  .  .  ,  and  when  He  who  is  our 
life  shall  appear,  we  also  shall  appear  with  Him  in  glory." 
The  Holy  Ghost  cometh  not  with  some  indescribable  influence 
to  work  some  formless  effect ;  but  He  doth  come  unto  us  for 
that  same  end  for  which  He  came  unto  the  virgin,  in  order 
to  beget  sons  of  God  within  and  out  of  our  fallen  substance. 
And  in  the  resurrection  we  shall  be  manifested  sons  of  God, 
with  what  glory  Christ  also  was  manifested,  and  we  shall 
reign  with  what  glory  He  reigneth.  Like  peers  of  a  royal 
court,  we  shall  ever  have  liberty  of  access  unto  our  King. 
The  Holy  Spirit  cometh  to  quicken,  in  the  living  soul  of 
every  elect  one,  a  spirit  whose  power  of  conformation  is  to 
reveal  in  us  Christ  the  hope  of  glory ;  to  constrain  and  to 


GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE.  445 

overcome  the  old  man,  with  his  corruptions  and  lusts  ;  to 
renew  us  after  the  image  of  God  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness ;  and  to  give  us,  as  we  have  shewed  above,  a  new 
subsistence,  which  is  not  the  subsistence  of  Adamhood,  but 
the  subsistence  of  Christhood  :  for  I  say,  that  the  renewed 
man  is  another  and  a  higher  form  of  creature  than  the  created 
man,  inasmuch  as  he  possesseth  in  him,  not  the  type,  but  the 
very  child  of  Christ.  For  more  truly  therefore,  brethren,  than 
we  are  one  in  Adam,  are  we  one  in  Christ :  for  the  unity  in 
Adam,  stamped  as  it  is  on  every  feature  of  the  body  and  of 
the  mind,  is  ever  contended  against  by  the  murderous  power 
of  Satan;  but  the  union  unto  Christ,  and  the  oneness  of  His 
people,  is  ever  contended  for  by  the  Almighty  Spirit  of  God. 
And  according  as  Christ  liveth  in  us,  according  as,  by  faith, 
we  do  incorporate  the  body  of  Christ  with  ourselves,  accord- 
ing as  we  assimilate  the  Divine  food  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
unto  that  life  which  we  have  in  baptism,  we  do  verily  increase 
in  the  stature,  in  the  wisdom,  in  the  power  of  Christ ;  and  we 
do  increase  in  love,  union,  and  fellowship  with  one  another, 
through  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  food  which  we  receive  from 
heaven,  that  immortal  food  which  we  have  in  the  Supper  of 
the  Lord,  though  it  be  flesh  and  blood,  is  not  flesh  and  blood 
subsisting  through  the  power  of  the  living  soul ;  natural  life 
cannot  quicken  it ;  natural  life  cannot  assimilate  it.  It  is  the 
flesh  and  blood  of  the  spiritual  life  which  the  Holy  Spirit  did 
sustain  in  Christ,  pure  and  spotless,  and  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  us  doth  assimilate  for  the  nourishment  of  His  life. 
For  the  Holy  Spirit,  though  He  hath  life  in  Himself,  hath 
laid  aside  the  manifestation  thereof;  and  hath  consented  to 
be  manifested,  as  having  life  derived  from  Christ :  even  as 
Christ  saith  that  the  Father  had  given  unto  Him  to  have  life 
in  Himself.  Therefore,  brethren,  words  cannot  express,  nor 
similitudes  shadow  forth,  the  true  union  which  there  is  be- 
tween a  believer  and  Christ  his  Head  ;  between  believers  and 
one  another.  We  live  not  up  to  our  privileges,  else  would  we 
know  this.  If  we  possessed  that  faith  which  feedeth  on 
Christ,  we  would  never  be  weak,  we  would  never  be  weary, 
we  would  never  be  overcome,  we  would  never  be  hidden  from 
His  presence.     He  would  dwell  in  us,  and  His  Father  would 


446  THE  INCARNATION,  ETC. 

dwell  in  us,  and  they  together  would  make  their  abode  with 
us.  And  whatever  we  should  ask  the  Father  in  His  name, 
believing,  we  should  receive;  and  He  would  prove  Himself  a 
faithful  High  Priest,  who  could  be  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  our  infirmities.  And  if  we  realised  that  faith  which  maketh 
one  with  Christ,  we  would  be  blessed  with  the  communion  of 
saints,  whereby  our  burdens  would  be  borne,  our  sorrows 
shared,  our  strength  imparted  to  the  weak,  and  our  weakness 
supplied  from  the  strong ;  our  poverty  made  up  out  of  their 
plenty,  and  a  Divine  circulation  of  the  living  spirit  of  life 
would  be  felt  unseen  ;  in  a  degree  it  would  also  be  seen,  but 
far  beyond  the  range  of  sight  it  would  be  felt  amongst  the 
members  of  Christ :  to  express  whose  love,  neighbourhood 
availeth  not,  nor  family  availeth ;  for  we  must  hate  father 
and  mother,  and  brother  and  sister,  to  be  His  disciple.  No 
form  of  communion  or  fellowship  in  this  world,  lying  in  the 
wicked  one,  availeth  to  represent  the  communion  of  the 
saints  and  the  unity  of  the  holy  catholic  Church.  The  loaf 
which  was  presented  at  the  table  this  morning,  one  lump,  and 
not  without  form,  to  be  broken  into  parts,  representeth  the 
oneness  of  the  substance  of  Christ's  body,  whereof  all  the  re- 
deemed are  parts :  the  identity  of  these  fragments  of  the  loaf 
which  we  took  into  our  hands,  and  eat  with  our  mouths,  the 
perfect  identity  of  every  crumb  with  the  whole  loaf,  is  our 
identity  and  oneness  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  with 
one  another.  Into  which,  as  ye  grow  by  the  bonds  of  holy 
charity,  ye  shall  rejoice  and  increase,  and  live  more  abun- 
dantly to  His  praise,  who  is  over  all  God  blessed  for  ever. 
Amen. 


THE  CHURCH, 

WITH  HER  ENDOWMENT  OF  HOLINESS  AND  POWER. 


THE  CHURCH, 

WITH  HER  ENDOWMENT  OF  HOLINESS  AND  POWER. 


"JVyTY  idea  of  the  Church  is  derived  from  its  name,  "The 
body  of  Christ ; "  and  of  its  endowment  from  the 
words  following,  "  The  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all," 
(Eph.  i.  23.)  It  is  one  as  much  as  the  Spirit  is  one :  "  There 
is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,"  (Eph.  iv.  4 ;)  and  as  the  body 
without  the  spirit  is  not  the  complete  work  of  God,  so  neither 
is  the  spirit  without  the  body.  When  Christ  went  unto  the 
Father,  He  entered  into  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
being  seated  on  the  Father's  throne,  began  to  act  the  Father's 
part,  of  governing  the  world.  Since  that  time  He  hath  been 
known  as  the  Spirit,  and  not  as  the  visible  Christ.  But  a 
spirit  is  not  that  which  God  appointed  this  world  to  be 
governed  by.  He  made  man  to  be  His  image  and  His 
King,  and  man  is  an  embodied  spirit.  And  when  man  be- 
came enslaved  to  Satan,  God,  keeping  in  His  own  hand  the 
sovereignty,  which  had  reverted  to  Himself  through  the  dis- 
obedience of  His  vicegerent,  did  hold  it,  not  in  His  character 
of  a  pure  spirit,  but  did  assume  to  Himself,  in  the  Word,  the 
parts,  affections,  properties,  and  attributes  of  a  man,  because 
as  a  man  He  was  to  redeem  all,  and  to  govern  all.  And  now 
that  as  a  man  He  hath  redeemed  all,  and  is  governing  all,  it 
were  inconsistent  with  the  great  idea  of  the  man-governor,  and 
not  the  spirit-governor,  that  Christ  should  now  rule  from  His 
invisible  throne  in  the  spirit  without  a  body.  This  body  is  the 
Church,  of  which  He,  Christ,  is  not  only  the  Spirit,  but  like- 
VOL.  V.  2  F 


450  THE  CHURCH: 

wise  the  Head.  And  the  Church  is  united  to  Him,  not  only 
by  having  Him  inspiring  her,  but  likewise  by  being  united 
with  Him  Avho  is  on  the  throne  of  God,  being  His  instru- 
ments, His  members,  for  demonstrating  before  the  world  as 
much  of  that  power  and  authority  which  He  hath  attained  to, 
as  is  proper  for  this  present  state  and  condition  of  the  world. 
This  body,  the  Church,  the  Father  giveth  to  Him.  It  is  the 
Father's  gift  of  an  inheritance  in  the  saints  unto  His  Son, 
Christ.  It  is  the  Father's  bringing  a  spiritual  seed  out  of 
Flim.  It  is  the  Father's  forming  a  wife  out  of  Him.  It 
is  the  Father's  producing  from  Him  a  race  of  sons  of 
God,  in  room  of  those  who  heretofore  mixed  themselves 
with  the  daughters  of  men,  and  forfeited  their  high  estate. 
It  is  the  Father's  deriving  from  Christ  the  royal  family  of 
kings  and  priests  by  whom  He  is  to  govern  the  worlds.  And 
the  Church,  thus  constituted  to  be  the  body  of  Christ  for  ever, 
through  whom  unto  eternity  He  may  put  forth  the  fulness  of 
Godhead  which  is  in  Him,  hath  at  present  upon  the  earth 
the  very  same  function  to  discharge ;  being  unto  Christ  for  a 
body  wherein  to  abide,  and  whereby  to  act  out  before  the 
world  that  office  of  a  gracious  Lord  and  holy  Christ  to  which 
He  hath  been  exalted  by  His  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
I  say,  the  self-same  office  doth  the  Church  now,  and  upon 
this  earth,  discharge,  which  she  shall  for  ever  and  over  all 
creation  discharge ;  being  the  members  of  one  Christ,  united 
by  one  spirit,  and  constituting  one  household,  and  following 
one  invariable  rule  and  principle  of  government,  though  con- 
sisting of  many  persons,  divers  memberships  ;  and  perhaps 
also  to  occupy,  as  they  now  do,  various  places  in  the  one 
creation  of  God.  Just  as,  to  compare  great  things  with 
small,  our  king,  by  his  members,  the  ambassadors,  governors, 
judges,  lord-lieutenants,  &c.,  doth  exercise  one  government, 
with  one  law  and  principle,  with  one  will  and  one  mind,  over 
the  vast  extent  of  his  dominion  ;  so  our  invisible  King,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  doth  at  present  put  forth,  by  means  of 
His  Church,  that  power  and  authority  upon  this  earth  which 
is  proper  now  to  be  put  forth.  This  is  our  idea  of  the  Church  ; 
and  we  give  it  without  hesitation  as  the  true  one  set  forth  in 
the  Scriptures. 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  451 

The  next  question  which  ariseth  is,  Into  what  power  hath 
Christ  entered  ;  and  how  much  of  that  power  is  it  His  good 
pleasure  to  put  forth  upon  this  earth  during  this  dispensation 
of  His  absence  ?  With  respect  to  the  first  part  of  the  ques- 
tion, I  answer  in  His  own  word  :  "  All  power  is  given  unto 
me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  Seated  in  God  the  Father's 
throne,  He  holdcth  God  the  Father's  sceptre,  and  exerciseth 
God  the  Father's  dominion.  He  is  now  creation's  God,  as 
He  was  heretofore  creation's  Surety  and  Bondsman  :  He  is 
now  creation's  sceptre-bearer,  as  He  was  heretofore  creation's 
burden-bearer.  Formerly  He  shewed  Himself  the  suffering, 
mortal  man  ;  now  He  shews  Himself  the  ruling,  life-quicken- 
ing God.  It  is  this  accession  of  honour  and  of  power  to 
which  as  Christ  He  passed,  upon  His  leaving  this  world  and 
going  to  the  Father,  that  forms  the  ground  of  His  consolation 
to  His  Church,  under  the  present  dispensation  of  His  absence. 
Therefore,  said  He,  it  was  expedient  for  them  that  He  should 
go  away,  for  otherwise  the  Comforter  could  not  come  :  there- 
fore, said  He,  they  should  do  greater  works  than  He  had  done, 
because  He  went  unto  the  Father.  And,  in  short,  the  key  to 
the  whole  of  that  consolatory  discourse  contained  in  the  14th, 
15th,  16th,  and  17th  chapters  of  John  is  this,  that  by  being 
absent  from  the  Church  in  the  world,  and  present  with  the 
Father,  He  should  enter  into  the  glory  and  the  power  which 
must  ever  abide  with,  and  ever  proceed  from,  the  secret  of 
the  Father's  dwelling-place  ;  which  to  possess  and  to  occupy, 
He  must  enter  there,  where  creature  never  before  did  enter, 
and  never  shall  enter  again,  and  where  He  entered,  because 
He  was  Creator  as  well  as  creature.  And  this  high  reward 
of  His  faithfulness,  and  demonstration  of  His  Divinity,  and 
repossession  of  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  be- 
fore the  world  was,  having  received  unto  Himself,  He  would, 
to  the  extent  this  present  world  can  bear,  make  manifest  by 
means  of  those  whom  the  Father  had  given  Him  out  of  the 
world  to  be  one  with  Him,  as  He  is  one  with  the  Father. 
With  this  comfort  He  comforteth  His  Church  over  His 
absence,  and  assureth  them  that  He  would  send  unto  them 
the  promise  of  the  Father,  even  power  from  the  Holy  Ghost, 
when  the  Holy  Ghost  should  have  come  upon  them,  (Luke 


452  THE  CHURCH: 

xxiv.  49  ;  Acts  i.  4,  8.)  That  the  Church  was  to  be  made 
sharers  in  some  way  of  that  accession  of  power  and  glory 
into  which  He  is  exalted,  is  the  consolation  with  which  He 
comforteth  them,  and  for  the  which  He  desireth  them  to  wait 
in  Jerusalem  until  they  shall  receive  power  from  on  high. 
And  as  to  the  other  part  of  this  inquiry,  to  wit,  How  much  of 
this  new  dignity  and  power  it  is  proper  for  Him  to  render, 
through  the  Church,  visible  unto  the  world,  we  are  willing  to 
be  guided  by  the  fact  that  it  was  communicated  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost,  and  by  the  testimonies  as  to  what  this  was  con- 
tained in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  That  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  was  then  given,  is  the  same  unto  which  we  are  all  bap- 
tized, (Acts  ii.  38,  39,)  and  with  the  hope  of  which  He  com- 
forteth His  Church  over  His  absence  ;  which,  therefore,  is  our 
comfort,  and  ought  to  be  our  possession.  The  question  is, 
then.  What  was  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  at  that  time  com- 
municated to  the  Church  ?  for  this  is  what  we  are  commanded 
to  hold  fast  till  He  come. 

Was  it  the  gift  of  perfect  holiness  in  flesh  }  I  answer,  No. 
This  we  have  in  consequence  of  His  life,  and  death,  and  re- 
surrection, or  rather  His  life  and  death ;  for  as  to  this  His 
resurrection  did  but  seal  what  His  life  and  death  had  pur- 
chased. That  which  was  by  His  life  and  death  accomplished 
is,  the  putting  away  of  sin  and  death  from  mortal  and  corrup- 
tible flesh.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world."  "  He  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of 
himself"  So  far,  therefore,  as  perfect  holiness  is  concerned, 
we  have  it  in  virtue  of  a  work  completed  at  the  resurrection, 
not  in  virtue  of  the  "  promise  of  the  Father,"  which  He  re- 
ceived after  His  resurrection.  In  order  to  become  members 
of  His  body,  we  must  believe  upon  His  work  of  putting  away 
sin  from  all  flesh  by  His  life  and  death ;  by  which  faith  we 
enter  into  a  holy  subsistence  in  the  holy  flesh  of  Christ  offered 
for  us  on  the  cross,  and  are  no  more  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the 
Spirit,  and  live  no  more  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit. 
This  regeneration,  this  renewal  after  the  image  of  God  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness,  this  dismissal  (or,  as  our  ver- 
sion lamely  translates  it,  remission)  of  sins  we  are  baptized 
into,  and  every  baptized  person  is  answerable  for  the  same. 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  453 

But  this  is  distinct  from  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  into  the 
promise  of  which  we  are  also  baptized ;  and  not  to  be  con- 
fused therewith,  without  confusing  the  work  which  Christ  by 
the  Spirit  did  in  flesh  with  that  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
into  which  He  entered  when  He  went  out  of  the  world  unto 
the  Father.  There  is  a  work  which  Christ  did  in  the  world  ; 
and  there  is,  distinct  from  this,  a  glory  and  a  power  and  a 
work  which  it  was  put  upon  Him  to  enjoy  and  to  execute  when 
He  went  out  of  the  world.  We  obtain  the  former  by  eating 
His  flesh  and  blood,  through  faith,  and  thereby  become  mem- 
bers of  His  holy  flesh,  to  do  in  flesh  the  work  of  holiness  which 
He  also  did.  The  other  we  are  thereby  qualified  to  become 
sharers  in,  by  being  made  members  of  His  body ;  and  in  it  we 
share  by  receiving  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  shed  down  upon 
the  Church  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  to  enable  the  Church  to 
put  forth  of  that  fulness  which  is  in  her  Head,  so  far  forth  as 
it  is  convenient  and  proper  that  the  same  should  be  put  forth 
in  this  mortal  state  before  this  sinful  world.  Perfect  holiness 
is  the  inward  law  and  condition  of  the  Church,  by  which  her 
union  with  her  perfectly  holy  Head  is  preserved.  Power  in 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  her  outward  action,  as  the  body  of  Christ, 
in  the  sight  of  the  world  ;  unto  the  manifestation  of  Christ's 
name  by  the  Church,  as  He  had  manifested  the  Father's 
name ;  unto  the  proclamation  of  Christ's  power,  grace,  and 
goodness  unto  the  world,  as  He  had  proclaimed  the  Father's. 
Christ,  by  His  union  with  the  Father,  did,  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh,  proclaim  the  Father's  glorious  name  and  superabound- 
ing  grace  ;  with  which  the  Father  being  satisfied,  doth,  for  the 
time  thence  following,  identify  the  name  of  Christ  with  His 
own,  and  constitute  a  Church  in  the  world,  which,  by  her  union 
with  Christ,  shall  be  able  to  testify  to  the  name  and  glory  of 
Christ,  who  testifieth  to  the  name  and  glory  of  the  Father. 
Christ  having  been,  and  being,  the  Father's  true  and  faithful 
witness,  doth  become  the  person  witnessed  of,  and  the  Church 
are  His  witnesses ;  whom  to  witness  is  to  witness  unto  Him 
who  witnesseth  unto  the  Father.  But  in  our  witness  we  are 
able  to  go  further  than  Christ  went,  for  this  reason,  that  in  the 
days  of  His  flesh,  the  mortality  of  flesh,  and  sin  in  flesh,  and 
the  principalities  and  powers  of  darkness,  therein  holding  their 


454  THE  CHURCH: 

throne  and  revelry,  were  not  yet  conquered,  condemned,  and 
openly  made  a  show  of ;  the  prison-house  of  the  grave  was 
not  yet  opened,  nor  its  captivity  was  not  yet  led  captive. 
The  Captain  of  our  Salvation  entered  into  a  field  wherein  the 
legion  of  our  enemies  lay  encamped  in  battle  order ;  we  enter 
into  a  field  all  strewn  with  the  wrecks  and  spoils  of  their  de- 
feat. We  are  baptized  into  flesh  redeemed,  into  a  world  dis- 
empowered,  whose  prince  is  judged  and  cast  out.  We  come 
not  to  fight  a  battle  which  is  already  fought,  but  to  ride  over 
the  necks  of  a  prostrate  foe.  They  idly  speak  who  say  that 
He  had  not  so  many  enemies  as  we — that  He  had  not  flesh  to 
contend  with.  Oh,  what  an  error !  It  is  there  we  have  the 
advantage  of  Him,  and  enter  into  the  fruits  of  His  victory. 
He  wrestled  Avith  sin  in  the  flesh,  and  condemned  it  utterly, 
dispossessed  it,  and  cast  it  out ;  we  enter  into  the  fruits  of  His 
warfare,  of  His  toil  and  sweat  and  blood.  O  ye  thoughtless 
and  ignorant  men,  (for  ignorance  is  your  only  apology,)  why 
will  you  go  about  to  take  away  from  Christ  the  glory  and  the 
greatness  of  His  work  !  I  am  ashamed  of  you.  I  grieve  that 
such  things  should  be  spoken  in  the  bosom  of  my  mother's 
family.  They  cannot  long  be  spoken  without  calling  down 
judgment  upon  the  house.  Either  the  truth  must  be  con- 
fessed, and  the  house  saved,  or  it  must  be  cast  out,  and  the 
house  destroyed.     But  to  return. 

What  portion  of  the  power  now  possessed  by  Christ  is  pro- 
per to  be  put  forth  upon  the  earth  during  this  season  of  Satan's 
presence  therein,  is  still  in  question  before  us  ;  though  I  hope, 
from  what  hath  been  said,  it  is  no  longer  in  question  how  that 
measure  and  portion  of  it  shall  be  put  forth.  The  body  is  the 
organ  by  which  the  spirit  within  a  man  doth  manifest  itself  to 
the  world  ;  and  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  the  Church,  is  the 
organ  by  which  He,  acting  from  the  invisible  seat  of  the 
Father  by  the  invisible  Spirit,  must  manifest  Himself  unto  the 
world.  There  is  no  other  medium  of  communication  between 
Christ  abiding  with  the  Father  and  the  world  but  the  Church 
in  the  flesh  ;  and  herein  the  Church  in  the  body  hath  a  mani- 
fest importance,  and,  I  would  say,  pre-eminence  of  usefulness, 
over  the  Church  disembodied,  in  that  she  is  the  organ  of  com- 
munication between  the  invisible  Christ  and  the  visible  world. 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  455 

This  being  fixed  and  settled,  we  now  come  to  the  nice  in- 
quiry, How  much  of  that  power,  which  Christ  hath  received, 
is  it  befitting  to  Him  and  the  Father  to  put  forth  by  the 
Church  in  this  the  day  of  His  absence  ?  And,  first,  it  may  be 
asked,  Why  not  the  whole  ?  The  answer  is.  That  if  the  whole 
were  put  forth,  the  devil  would  be  cast  out,  and  all  wicked 
men  with  him,  and  sin,  and  death,  and  all  obstruction,  and 
contradiction,  and  darkness,  and  dishonour,  into  the  lake  that 
burnetii,  there  to  consume  for  ever  and  ever ;  and  there  would 
be  nothing  to  be  done  at  his  coming  again.  There  is  an  eco- 
nomy in  the  putting  forth  of  that  power  which  resideth  in  the 
Father's  throne  ;  an  economy  which  answereth  to  the  times 
and  the  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  His  own  power. 
Therefore  it  is  that  in  the  writings  of  the  apostles  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  spoken  of  only  as  a  first-fruits  of  that  which 
is  yet  to  be  received  ;  and  the  full  harvest  is  made  to  consist  in 
the  redemption  of  the  body,  as  it  is  written,  (Rom.  viii.  23,)  "And 
not  only  they,  but  ourselves  also,  which  have  the  first-fruits 
of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves,  wait- 
ing for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body."  This 
passage  instructeth  me,  that  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  by  the  Church, 
now  possessed,  is  the  first-fruits  of  that  complete  power  of  the 
Spirit  which  she  shall  possess  when  the  body  shall  be  redeemed 
from  the  corruption  of  the  grave  ;  and  the  context  further  in- 
structeth me,  that  the  whole  creation  is  groaning,  and  travail- 
ing, and  crying  unto  God,  for  a  redemption  which  she  shall 
receive  at  the  same  time  from  the  bondage  of  corruption : 
"  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together 
until  now  ;  and  not  only  they,"  &c.  "  The  earnest  expec- 
tation of  the  creation  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the 
sons  of  God."  The  apostle  Paul  evidently  saw  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  and  their  manifestation  as  the 
sons  of  God,  and  wuth  them  the  redemption  of  the  whole  crea- 
tion from  its  present  bondage,  to  be  that  complete  harvest  of 
the  Spirit  whereof  the  Church  doth  now  possess  only  the  first- 
fruits,  that  is,  the  first  ripe  grains  which  could  be  formed  into  a 
sheaf,  and  presented  in  the  temple  as  a  wave-offering  unto 
the  Lord.  Most  strikingly  confirmatory  of  this  is  what  he 
declarcth  concerning  the  same  gift  of  the  Spirit,  in  his  Epistle 


456  THE  CHURCH: 

to  the  Ephesians,  (chap.  i.  13,  14:)  "  In  whom  also,  after  that 
ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise, 
which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance  until  the  redemption  of 
the  purchased  possession,  unto  the  praise  of  his  glory."  And 
likewise  in  the  4th  chapter  of  the  same  Epistle  he  saith, 
"  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed 
unto  the  day  of  redemption."  And  the  self-same  language 
holdeth  he  twice  over  in  his  2d  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians, 
(i.  22,) — "  Who  hath  also  sealed  us,  and  given  the  earnest  of 
the  Spirit  in  our  hearts  3"  (v.  5,)  — "  Now  he  that  hath  wrought 
us  for  the  selfsame  thing  is  God,  who  also  hath  given  unto 
us  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit."  In  all  these  passages  the  gift 
of  the  Spirit  which  the  Church  had  received,  and  was  pos- 
sessed of,  is  set  forth  as  an  earnest  or  pledge  of  what  she  is 
to  receive  and  possess  against  that  day  called  the  day  of 
redemption,  and  the  redemption  of  the  inheritance.  The 
inheritance  is  the  earth  and  the  inferior  creation ;  not  yet 
redeemed  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  but  to  be  re- 
deemed, according  to  St  Paul,  in  the  day  of  the  manifestation 
of  the  sons  of  God  ;  in  the  day  of  the  redemption  of  the  body; 
in  the  day  of  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  ;  in  the  day  of  the 
casting  out  of  the  devil  and  his  works  ;  in  the  day  of  the  de- 
struction of  death,  and  the  victory  over  the  grave.  The 
"earnest"  (by  which  it  is  also  named)  is,  like  the  first-fruits, 
only  a  part  of  that  which  is  yet  to  be  earned  ;  and  also,  like 
them,  of  the  same  kind,  but  not  in  the  same  measure ;  a  par- 
tial, not  a  complete  thing, — yea,  but  a  small  part  of  the  whole, 
and  yet  sufficient  surety  that  the  whole  shall,  in  the  fulness 
of  the  times,  be  likewise  ours.  Wherefore,  also,  it  is  called 
the  seal,  being  that  mark  which  God  affixeth  upon  His  people, 
and  by  which  He  determineth  that  they  are  His. 

Now,  if  any  one  has  been  accustomed  to  interpret  these 
passages  of  the  regenerating  and  sanctifying  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  he  must,  with  all  speed,  disabuse  himself  of  that  error, 
which  compromises  a  great  point  of  personal  holiness.  For 
if  the  thing  spoken  of  in  these  passages  be  regeneration  and 
sanctification,  then  is  that  work  of  the  Spirit  only  a  partial 
and  incomplete  work,  and  we  cannot  look  for  anything  be- 
yond a  first-fruits  of  holiness,  an  earnest  of  holiness ;  which 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  457 

is  to  sanctify  the  imperfections  and  shortcomings  of  a  be- 
liever, and  to  fix  him  in  very  partial  holiness,  and  to  take 
away  from  him  both  the  hope  and  the  desire  of  being 
holy  as  God  is  holy,  and  perfect  as  our  Father  in  heaven 
is  perfect.  No  :  we  are  baptized  into  perfect  holiness,  into 
the  positive  and  absolute  dismissal  of  all  sin,  into  the  burial 
of  the  flesh  with  its  corruptions  and  lusts,  the  quickening  of 
the  Spirit  into  all  holiness.  "  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life 
doth  make  us  free  from  the  law  of  death  ;"  and  every  short- 
coming from  this  perfect  righteousness  is  a  stain  upon  our 
white  raiment,  which  must  be  instantly  confessed  and  grieved 
over,  and  washed  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ;  it  cannot 
be  tolerated,  it  cannot  be  indulged,  it  cannot  be  sanctioned 
from  Scripture  ;  it  ought  not  to  exist  within  the  Church  ;  it 
is  an  offence  to  God,  a  disgrace  to  the  body  of  Christ,  and 
cannot  be  justified  by  any  means.  Those  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture, therefore,  which  speak  of  a  gift  of  the  Spirit  which  is 
only  first-fruits  of  something  greater  and  better,  cannot,  must 
not  be  referred  to  regeneration  and  sanctification,  but  to  that 
power  of  government  and  authority  entered  into  by  Christ 
when  He  passed  out  of  the  world  unto  the  Father ;  whereof 
it  is  expedient  and  economical  that  a  part  only  should  be 
possessed  and  exhibited  by  the  Church  during  this  our  mortal 
estate.  It  is,  moreover,  manifest  that  these  passages  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  cleansing  of  the  conscience  from  dead 
works,  which  proceeds  from  the  blood  of  Christ,  (Heb.  xiii.  ;) 
and  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  which  proceeds  from 
baptism,  (i  Peter)  :  not  only  because  these  are  complete 
works,  and  not  first-fruits  and  earnests,  but  also  because  the 
work  spoken  of  is  connected  with  the  redemption  of  the  in- 
heritance, with  the  deliverance  of  the  creation,  with  which  the 
work  in  the  conscience  hath  nothing  to  do.  The  work  of 
soul-cleansing,  which  regeneration  is,  is  wholly  spiritual,  and 
not  part  or  parcel  of  the  work  of  redeeming  the  body  and  the 
inheritance,  which  is  wholly  natural  or  physical.  The  crea- 
tion, natural  or  physical,  was  finished  when  the  body  of  man 
was  created  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth  ;  the  creation  spiritual 
began  when  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life, 
and  he  became  a  living  soul.     In  the  redemption,  or  regenera- 


458  THE  CHURCH: 

tion,  the  thing  is  reversed.  First  the  soul  within  is  cleansed, 
whereby  Christ  proveth  Himself  to  have  been  the  Creator  of 
the  invisible  Spirit, — Him  who  breathed  it  into  man  ;  and  the 
spirit  of  man,  thus  redeemed  and  regenerated  by  its  Creator, 
is  left  alone  in  the  midst  of  an  unredeemed  and  unregenerated 
world,  to  shew  its  separateness  therefrom,  and  superiority 
thereto,  by  triumphing  over  all  creation's  evil  propensities, 
and  enforcing  all  creation,  with  the  body  which  commands  it, 
to  do  homage  unto  Christ,  its  King  and  Lord.  And  to  make 
it  the  more  manifest  that  this  period  between  the  regenera- 
tion and  the  redemption  of  the  body  is  the  period  for  testify- 
ing the  supremacy  of  spirit  over  nature,  of  soul  over  body 
and  bodily  dependencies,  not  only  is  the  body,  and  the  world 
its  servant,  left  under  the  law  of  corruption  and  death,  and 
yet  made  obedient  unto  the  law  of  holiness  and  life,  but  also 
the  person  of  Christ,  by  whose  power  alone  this  supremacy 
of  the  regenerate  soul  is  maintained,  is  taken  out  of  the  world, 
and  the  communication  between  Him  and  our  souls  is  carried 
on,  not  through  sense,  but  through  faith, — not  by  vision,  but  by 
the  invisible  Spirit.  So  that,  ever  since  the  departure  of  Christ 
out  of  the  world  unto  the  Father,  it  hath  been  a  season  and  a 
time  for  making  apparent,  and  putting  beyond  doubt,  the  truth, 
that  Christ  was  the  Father  of  the  living  soul ;  that  He  is  the  Re- 
deemer of  it ;  and  that,  through  faith  and  union  with  Him, 
living  souls  can  and  will  govern  the  corporeal  world.  In  one 
word,  during  the  absence  of  Christ  there  have  been  regenerate 
souls  and  an  unregenerate  world,  and  these  regenerate  souls 
have  performed  the  will  of  God  in  despite  of  unregenerate 
bodies  and  an  unregenerate  world.  This,  now,  is  the  mystery 
of  the  regeneration  of  the  soul,  which,  as  we  have  said,  is  not 
part  and  parcel  of  the  body  and  world  to  be  regenerate,  but 
is  the  opposite  thereof ;  and  therefore  I  conclude,  with  a  cer- 
tainty which  they  only  who  understand  doctrine  can  feel,  that 
those  passages,  in  which  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  set 
forth  as  an  earnest  of  the  redemption  of  the  world,  cannot 
have  any  reference  whatever  to  the  regeneration  of  the  soul, 
or  cleansing  of  the  conscience,  or  renewal  of  the  spirit,  which 
we  are  baptized  into. 

These  thoughts  may  be  judged  more  deep  than  pertinent 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  459 

to  the  subject  in  hand.  They  are  indeed  very  deep,  and  I 
devoutly  praise  God  for  having  been  able  to  express  what  I 
have  long  brooded  in  my  mind  :  but  they  are  likewise  very 
pertinent,  and  yield  a  complete  solution  of  the  question  in 
hand.  For,  seeing  that  the  thing  which  is  now  proceeding, 
according  to  the  economy  of  the  Divine  purpose,  is  the  mani- 
festation of  a  renewed  spirit's  power  to  do  God's  will,  despite 
of  a  rebel  flesh  and  world ;  and  to  testify  the  power  which 
Christ,  by  means  of  the  reasonable  soul,  shall  yet  exercise 
over  the  world,  to  quicken  the  dust  of  corrupted  bodies,  to 
renew  the  decayed  face  of  the  earth,  and  to  cast  forth  of  the 
world's  verge  the  recreant  spirits  of  darkness,  with  their 
retinue  of  wicked  men  ;  and  seeing  that,  while  we  have  the 
completeness  of  the  former,  we  have  only  the  first  fruits  of 
the  latter ;  we  ought  now  to  find  in  the  renewed  spirits  of 
men  a  power  and  faculty  to  exhibit  in  the  body  and  upon 
the  body,  in  the  world  and  upon  the  world,  such  actings  of 
Christ  as  shall  not  only  foreshew,  but  really  be,  a  first  fruits 
and  earnest  of  that  perfect  and  complete  acting  in  which  He 
is  to  go  forth  when  He  comes  to  redeem  the  body  and  to  re- 
deem the  inheritance.  If,  now,  you  ask  me  to  come  to  closer 
quarters,  and  tell  you  distinctly  what  these  actings  be,  I 
accept  the  challenge  most  willingly,  and  proceed  to  shew  you 
them,  first,  in  promise  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  and, 
secondly,  in  existence  in  the  Church. 

I.  This  power  is  contained  in  promise  in  many  parts  of 
Scripture:  as  in  Isa.  viii.  18,  where  Christ  declareth  of  Him- 
self, and  His  children  by  regeneration,  that  they  are  for  signs 
and  for  wonders;  and  in  the  prophecy  of  Joel,  which  hath 
reference  to  that  fulness  of  which  we  have  received,  and  do 
enjoy,  only  the  first  fruits ;  and  twice  by  the  Lord  in  these 
words,  "  If  your  faith  were  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  ye 
would  say  unto  this  mountain.  Remove,  and  be  cast  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea,  and  it  would  be  done  unto  you:"  and 
again  in  that  strong  asseveration,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  He  that  believeth  on  me,  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he 
do  also  ;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do  ;  because  I 
go  unto  my  Father,"  (John  xiv.   12.)     But  it  is  most  fully 


46o  THE  CHURCH: 

developed  in  the  last  verses  of  the  Gospel  by  Mark,  from 
which  I  prefer  to  set  forth  the  endowment  in  promise.  The 
last  six  verses  of  that  chapter  contain  the  substance  of  the 
Church's  commission,  given  to  her  in  the  persons  of  the 
eleven  apostles,  commanding  them  to  go  and  preach  the 
gospel  of  the  kingdom  to  every  creature  under  heaven,  with 
the  assurance  that  "  whosoever  believed  it,  and  was  baptized, 
should  be  saved ;  whosoever  believed  it  not,  should  be 
damned."  Then  addeth  He  these  words,  "  And  these  signs 
shall  follow  them  that  believe :  In  my  name  shall  they  cast 
out  devils  ;  they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues ;  they  shall 
take  up  serpents  ;  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing,  it  shall 
not  hurt  them  ;  they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they 
shall  recover,"  (Mark  xvi.  17,  18.)  These  words  being  spoken, 
it  is  said  that  "  He  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  at  the 
right  hand  of  God  ;  and  that  they  went  forth  and  preached 
everywhere,  the  Lord  confirming  the  word  with  signs  follow- 
ing." Now,  then,  it  is  to  these  signs  that  I  would  direct  your 
attention,  as  containing  the  particulars  of  that  gift  of  power 
which  was  superadded  to  the  work  of  complete  regeneration 
sealed  up  to  the  believer  in  baptism.  They  consist  of  five 
particulars  : — First,  the  casting  out  of  devils.  This  is  a  first 
fruits  of  that  casting  out  of  Satan  and  his  angels  into  the 
bottomless  pit,  to  be  reserved  in  chains  of  darkness  unto  the 
judgment  of  the  great  day,  which  shall  be  accomplished  at 
the  redemption  of  the  body  and  the  inheritance.  And  be- 
cause Satan  is  the  author  and  continuer  of  the  bondage  from 
which  Christ  came  to  redeem,  whose  works  Christ  was  mani- 
fested to  destroy,  the  Church,  in  order  to  possess  and  shew 
forth  unto  the  world  what  Christ  will  yet  do  by  that  devil 
whose  thrall  the  world  is,  hath  given  to  her  power  in  the 
Spirit  to  cast  out  devils  from  the  bodies  of  men ;  and  thus 
doth  she  rebuke  the  world  of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of 
this  world  is  judged ;  and  she  shews  that  the  kingdom  of 
God  is  come  nigh  unto  men,  when  their  children  are  able 
to  cast  the  devils  out.  Christ's  supremacy  in  the  spiritual 
world,  the  completeness  of  His  redemption,  is  continually 
declared  by  this  power  in  the  Church  to  cast  out  devils ;  and 
a  testimony  is  continually  kept  up  for  the  truth,  against  the 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  461 

continual  He  of  Satan  and  the  world,  that  he  is  its  prince, 
and  that  all  its  kingdoms  are  his.  No,  says  the  Church  ; 
Christ  is  the  King,  and  in  His  name  I  cast  Satan  and  his 
tribes  out  of  the  bodies  of  men. 

The  second  of  those  particulars  embodied  in  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  is,  that  they  should  "  speak  with  new  tongues ;" 
which  had  been  prophesied  of  by  Isaiah,  (chap,  xxviii.  11,) 
and  was  given  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Now,  this  is  the  de- 
monstration that  Christ  is  the  Lord  of  human  spirits,  as  the 
former  is  the  demonstration  of  His  being  Lord  over  evil  spirits. 
For  to  use  my  tongue  is  the  prerogative  of  my  soul ;  no  other 
human  person  but  myself  can  use  it :  if,  therefore,  it  be  used 
in  such  a  manner  as  I  cannot — for  example,  to  speak  a 
tongue  which  I  do  not  understand,  and  in  that  tongue  to 
utter  reasonable  speech — then  is  it  true  that  another  holdeth 
the  mastery  over  me.  Who  that  other  is,  must  be  deter- 
mined by  the  thing  which  is  spoken  ;  for  devils,  we  know, 
did  use  the  tongues  of  men  to  utter  things  which  they  them- 
selves knew  not,  and  could  not  know :  confessing  Jesus  to  be 
the  Christ,  and  the  Holy  One  of  God.  And,  therefore,  in 
order  to  determine  and  try  the  spirit  which  spoke,  certain 
tests  were  given,  of  which  these  two  are  the  chief — to  wit, 
whether  their  words  bore  testimony  of  the  true  flesh  and  to 
the  real  lordship  of  Christ.  This  being  ascertained,  then  the 
spirit  which  possessed  the  man,  and  used  his  tongue,  is 
known  to  be  the  Spirit  of  God ;  which  is  distributed  through 
the  body  by  Christ,  the  Head  of  the  body  ;  who  therefore  is 
proved  to  be  Lord  of  human  reason,  inhabiter  of  the  souls  of 
men,  not  by  a  figure,  but  in  very  truth,  when  forth  from  the 
souls  of  men  He  speak eth  the  glorious  things  of  God  in 
words  which  they  understand  not,  and  of  which  they  must 
receive  the  interpretation  at  another  time,  or  from  another 
person,  certainly  by  another  act  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  The 
presence  of  Christ  in  the  souls  of  His  people ;  His  power  to 
actuate  their  will,  and  to  use  their  tongue,  and  by  it  to  ex- 
press the  forms  of  reasonable  truth,  while  they  themselves 
are  all  passive  in  His  hands,  as  the  trumpet  in  the  hand  of 
the  priest,  doth  clearly  demonstrate  Him  to  be  the  Lord  of 
the  souls  of  men,  and  able  to  use  their  tongues,  as  hereafter 


462  THE  CHURCH: 

He  will  do,  in  giving  forth  His  word  unto  all  the  regions  of 
creation.  It  is  a  first  fruits  of  that  power  which  shall  be 
hereafter,  inasmuch  as,  though  it  be  uttered  to  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  it  is  not  by  them  obeyed ;  whereas  in  the  time 
to  come,  in  the  eternal  age,  through  them,  even  through  the 
members  of  His  Church,  He  shall  speak  to  all  regions  of  the 
world,  and  it  shall  be  done.  The  former  proveth  Him  to  be 
the  Lord  of  evil  spirits,  to  cast  them  out  of  men ;  this 
proveth  Him  to  be  the  Lord  of  human  spirits,  to  fill  them 
with  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God ;  and  these  two 
together  do  leave  mankind  without  excuse ;  for  what  doth 
man  want  but  a  Redeemer  who  is  able  to  cast  the  devil  out 
and  to  bring  God  into  him  again.  There  are  many  other 
things  connected  with  the  gift  of  tongues,  into  which  we 
cannot  enter  in  this  place  ;  but  that  which  we  have  stated  is, 
we  believe,  the  substance  of  it  considered  as  a  sign. 

Now  the  third  particular  brings  us  at  once  out  of  the  spiri- 
tual into  the  material  world  :  "  They  shall  take  up  serpents." 
It  was  said  of  the  serpent,  "  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee 
and  the  woman  ;"  and  between  serpents  and  mankind  there 
is  a  deadly  enmity,  insomuch  that  the  poison  of  serpents  will 
not  only  almost  instantaneously  destroy  life,  but  reduce  the 
body  to  corruption  :  and  therefore  in  this  place  it  is  put  forth 
as  the  representative  of  that  enmity  which  is  come  between 
man  and  the  lower  creatures,  which  were  made  to  reverence, 
to  serve,  and  not  to  destroy  him.  Now  to  this  curse  of  rebel- 
liousness the  creatures  were  made  subject  not  willingly:  it  is 
not  their  nature  by  creation,  but  it  is  the  cruel  sign  of  their 
stern  bondage  to  the  enemy  of  man.  By  receiving  power 
from  the  Holy  Ghost,  therefore,  to  take  up  serpents,  it  is  sig- 
nified that  Christ  hath  redeemed  the  lower  creatures  also  from 
their  bondage  ;  and  restored  man  to  that  supremacy  over  the 
animals,  and  the  animals  to  that  innocent  obedience  of  man, 
with,  and  for  which,  man  and  they  were  created.  The  Church, 
therefore,  by  possessing  this  power  to  take  up  serpents,  gives 
a  manifest  sign  unto  the  world  that  a  time  is  surely  to  come 
when  "  the  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard 
shall  lie  down  with  the  kid  ;  and  the  calf,  and  the  young  lion, 
and  the  fatling  together ;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them  : 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  463 

and  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed  ;  their  young  ones  shall 
lie  down  together :  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox : 
and  the  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and 
the  weaned  child  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den," 
(Isa.  xi.  6-8.)  The  Church,  by  possessing  this  power,  hath  in 
her  hand  the  earnest  and  first-fruits  of  that  power  "  over  the 
sheep  and  oxen  and  beasts,  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  fish 
of  the  sea,  and  whatsoever  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the 
sea,"  which  Christ  hath  purchased  for  Himself,  and  possesseth 
in  full  right  as  Lord  of  all  ;  which,  however,  it  suitcth  not 
the  economy  of  the  Father's  times  that  He  should  take  upon 
Him  at  present,  but  of  which  He  giveth  to  the  Church  an 
earnest,  and  by  her  giveth  to  the  world  a  sign,  that  He  will 
in  the  fulness  of  time  take  unto  Himself. 

But  beside  the  animal  creation,  which  was  originally  sub- 
ject unto  man,  and  is  now  subject  unto  him  again  in  the 
person  of  Christ  Jesus,  there  is  the  inanimate  or  elemental 
creation  also,  which  hath  escaped  from  its  subserviency,  and 
become  enslaved  unto  evil.  The  poisons  which  the  earth 
produceth,  the  noxious  vapours  exhaled  from  the  waters,  and 
the  deadly  infections  which  the  air  scattereth  abroad,  the 
storms  and  tempests  which  devastate  the  face  of  the  world, — 
these,  and  all  other  violences,  are  the  signs  of  that  bondage 
into  which  sin  hath  brought  all  things,  and  out  of  which  Christ 
by  His  righteousness  hath  redeemed  all  things.  And  when 
the  fulness  of  the  time  is  come  for  Him  to  appear  again.  He 
shall  come  as  the  Liberator  of  all  nature  from  her  thraldom. 
If,  now,  Christ  have  in  hand  power  to  redeem  all  nature  out 
of  the  bonds  of  evil,  and  the  Church  have  in  the  Holy  Ghost 
a  first-fruits  thereof,  she  must  possess  the  power  of  miracles, 
to  arrest  the  evil  course  of  things,  and  to  turn  them  into  that 
righteous  course  which  they  shall  observe  for  ever  ;  power  she 
ought  to  possess  over  the  laws  of  the  world,  such  as  was  pos- 
sessed by  our  Lord  when  He  stilled  the  raging  winds  and 
calmed  the  tempestuous  deep.  And  forasmuch  as  poisons 
are  the  most  pregnant  evidences  of  the  evil  condition  of 
nature,  Christ,  by  giving  to  him  that  believeth  power  over 
the  same  to  suspend  their  evil  effects,  doth  thereby  give  unto 
His  Church  the  best  first-fruits  of  that  power  which  He  now 


464  THE  CHURCH: 

possesseth,  and  she  shall  hereafter  possess, — the  power  to 
press  out  from  every  plant,  and  from  every  element  of  nature, 
the  various  principles  of  death  and  destructiveness.  For 
which  reason  it  is,  that  in  the  Scriptures  all  nature  is  repre- 
sented as  rejoicing  in  the  prospect  of  the  Lord's  coming ;  as 
for  example  :  "  Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  and  let  the  earth  be 
glad ;  let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof ;  let  the  field 
be  joyful,  and  all  that  is  therein  :  then  shall  all  the  trees  of 
the  wood  rejoice  before  the  Lord :  for  he  cometh  to  judge  the 
earth:  he  shall  judge  the  world  with  righteousness,  and  the 
people  with  his  truth,"  (Ps.  xcvi.) 

By  the  last  two  particulars  are  established  the  supremacy 
of  man's  body  over  all  nature,  and  the  ministry  of  all  nature 
to  its  health  and  well-being,  as  parts  of  the  redemption  which 
Christ  hath  wrought  out  for  those  that  believe ;  and  by  the 
two  former,  the  supremacy  of  man's  soul  over  the  devils,  and 
its  subjection  to  God  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  likewise 
shewn  to  be  of  that  redemption  purchased  by  Christ ;  but 
there  still  remaineth  one  part  of  creation — to  wit,  man's  body 
— over  which,  by  these  signs,  the  redemption  of  Christ  should 
be  shewn  to  extend  ;  and  this  we  have  as  the  last  particular : 
"  They  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they  shall  recover." 
Sickness  is  sin  apparent  in  the  body,  the  presentiment  of 
death,  the  forerunner  of  corruption.  Disease  of  every  kind  is 
mortality  begun.  Now,  as  Christ  came  to  destroy  death,  and 
will  yet  redeem  the  body  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  if 
the  Church  is  to  have  a  first-fruits  or  earnest  of  this  power,  it 
must  be  by  receiving  power  over  diseases,  which  are  the  first- 
fruits  and  earnest  of  death ;  and  this  being  given  to  her,  com- 
pletes the  circle  of  her  power.  For  in  creation  there  is  no 
more  than  these  five  parts :  the  pure  spirit,  the  embodied 
soul  of  man,  the  body  of  man,  the  animal  creation,  and  the 
inanimate  world  :  of  all  which  sin  hath  taken  possession,  and 
over  all  which  Christ  hath  obtained  superiority,  to  reconsti- 
tute them  in  that  way  which  shall  for  ever  demonstrate  the 
being  and  attributes  of  God.  This  superiority,  this  owner- 
ship, He  now  inheriteth  in  sole  right  and  possession  ;  but, 
evermore  willing  to  shew  forth  His  dutifulness  to  His  Father, 
not  less  on  heaven's  throne  than  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  465 

and  on  the  cross,  He  doth  wait  upon  the  Father's  will  to 
determine  the  time  when  the  day  of  complete  redemption  shall 
at  length  arrive  ;  and  the  Father,  in  order  to  gratify  the  Son, 
and  make  known  His  surpassing  goodness  and  the  riches  of 
His  glory,  doth  beget  unto  Him,  out  of  sinful  flesh,  a  body, 
the  Church,  unto  whom  He  may  communicate  His  fulness, 
an(5  by  whom  He  may  express  it  unto  all  creation ;  ruling 
and  governing,  by  these  His  kings  and  priests,  those  innumer- 
able worlds  which  He  hath  purchased  with  His  blood,  (for  the 
heavenly  things,  as  well  as  the  earthly  things,  were  purified 
by  His  blood  :)  and  meanwhile,  until  the  day  of  the  refresh- 
ing, until  the  restitution  of  all  things  cometh.  He  doth,  by 
means  of  this  Church,  which  the  Father  hath  given  to  Him 
for  a  body,  and  which  He  hath  informed  with  His  own  Spirit, 
communicate  a  first-fruits  and  earnest  of  that  power  which 
He  is  hereafter  by  their  means  to  express  in  its  fulness,  and 
to  hold  for  ever.  And  this  He  doth  to  the  end  that  devils, 
and  devil-possessed  men,  may  know  the  certainty  of  that 
doom  which  abideth  them,  and  that  the  latter  may  cast  in 
their  lot  with  the  righteous  and  be  saved  ;  while  to  the  bodies 
of  men,  and  to  all  inferior  creation.  He  doth  make  sure  that 
redemption  from  the  grave  and  from  the  curse  which  they 
shall  surely  obtain.  This  first-fruits  of  power,  to  cast  the 
devils  into  hell,  to  raise  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  and  to  hold 
the  superiority  of  all  inferior  creation,  being  possessed  by  the 
believing  Church,  doth  continually  demonstrate  and  signify 
unto  the  world  who,  and  of  what  kind,  their  Redeemer  is ; 
who,  and  of  what  kind,  is  that  man,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whom 
God  hath  constituted  both  Christ  and  Lord.  This  first-fruits 
and  earnest  of  the  inheritance  of  power  and  prerogative,  which 
under  Him  we  are  yet  to  hold,  is  likewise  the  Church's  argu- 
ment to  men  of  their  certain  destruction,  if  they  come  not 
forth  from  the  world  ;  of  their  superlative  dignity  and  honour, 
if  they  do  come  forth  from  it  into  the  bosom  of  the  Church. 
It  is  a  sign  of  that  which  we  preach  Christ  to  be, — Lord  of 
all.  It  is  a  sign  of  that  which  we  preach  Him  as  about  to  do, 
— to  cast  out  devils,  to  raise  the  dead,  and  to  liberate  the 
creature.  It  is  a  sign  of  what  we,  the  Church,  are,  in  real 
uninterrupted  union  with  Him,  holding  a  real  power  under 
VOL.  V.  2  G 


466  THE  CHURCH: 

Him, — the  arm  of  His  strength,  the  temple  of  His  presence, 
the  tongue  of  His  Spirit,  the  manifoldness  of  His  wisdom,  the 
kings  and  the  priests  of  Christ  for  God. 

This,  now,  is  an  exhibition  of  the  length  and  breadth  of  that 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  the  Church  hath,  in  earnest  of 
that  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all ;  which  is  her  pre- 
rogative ;  for  which  in  the  fulness  of  time  she  waits  ;  holding 
it  now  in  faith,  then  to  have  it  in  possession.  Our  evidence- 
writers  have  never  comprehended  the  depths  of  this  subject  : 
their  books  are  mere  rag-rolls,  fragments,  and  tatters  of  the 
substantial  doctrine:  no  Christian^ writings,  but  metaphysical 
or  antiquarian  researches.  These  miracles  they  make  to  stand 
merely  in  their  power  :  and  so,  say  they,  they  demonstrate 
God  to  be  with  the  worker  of  them :  and  if  so,  then  are  they 
signs  that  He  is  sent  by  God,  and  ought  with  prostration  of 
mind  to  be  listened  to.  Now,  be  this  granted,  and  what  to 
do  hath  it  with  Christ  ?  It  were  an  argument  for  an  heathen 
as  good  as  for  a  Christian.  It  is  merely  an  argument  that  the 
God  of  nature  is  with  this  man  ;  there  is  no  recognition  of 
Christ  as  the  doer  of  the  work  ;  there  is  no  recognition  of  the 
work  itself  being  part  and  parcel  of  Christ's  redemption.  In- 
deed, the  substance  or  nature  of  the  work  is  never  once  con- 
sidered by  these  evidence-writers.  But,  besides  the  leanness 
and  emptiness  of  their  speculation,  I  deny  both  the  premises 
and  the  conclusion.  First,  the  premises,  that  a  mere  miracle 
demonstrates  God  to  be  the  worker.  Miracles  have  been  done 
by  the  power  of  Satan  and  Beelzebub  ;  and  more  are  promised 
to  be  done ;  and  no  man  can  tell  what  power  beyond  man's 
science  the  spirits  of  darkness  possess.  It  is  not  the  power- 
fulness,  but  the  moral  character  of  the  miracle,  that  proves  it 
to  be  Divine.  Is  it  in  the  way  of  evil  or  of  good  .''  in  the  way 
of  redemption  or  of  bondage  }  is  it  in  furtherance  or  hindrance 
of  Satan's  kingdom  }  The  miracle  appeals  to  the  moral  part 
of  man  ;  to  the  conscience,  and  not  to  his  power.  Next,  I 
deny  their  conclusion.  Men  may  do  miracles  in  the  name  of 
Christ,  and  yet  be  wicked  men  :  as  our  Lord  himself  declares, 
that  many  shall  say  in  that  day.  Have  we  not  in  Thy  name 
cast  out  devils,  and  done  many  wonderful  works  .''  of  whom  He 
shall  profess  that  He  never  knew  them.     A  man  may  possess 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  4^7 

the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  and  yet  fall  away  into  evil 
courses,  (Heb.  vi.)  Wherefore  I  say,  that  the  circumstance  of 
a  man's  doing  miracles,  or  having  done  miracles,  doth  not  seal 
up  every  word  he  speaketh  as  truth,  even  though  these  miracles 
be  done  in  the  name  of  Christ,  and  by  the  power  of  God.  The 
word  he  speaks  appealeth  to  the  conscience  of  man ;  and  God 
did  never  intend  that  man  in  hearing  his  word  should  be  less 
than  man,  a  being  responsible,  and  conscious  of  moral  truth. 
But  my  present  occupation  is  not  to  reprove  the  modern  evi- 
dence-writers ;  whom  I  would  not  have  noticed  in  this  place, 
had  it  not  been  to  shew  the  true  origin  of  that  most  erroneous 
opinion  of  these  latter  times,  and  of  this  Protestant  section  of  the 
Church,  that  these  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  intended  only 
for  a  season,  until  the  canon  of  Scripture  was  completed,  and 
the  Book  had  found  a  place  and  an  authority  amongst  men. 
The  whole  of  this  idea  is  a  tissue  of  error  and  contradiction, 
which  it  is  not  my  present  business  to  expose.  Yet  from  this 
account,  meagre  and  false  as  it  is,  of  the  "  signs  and  wonders, 
and  diverse  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  hath 
sprung  the  diabolical  hatred  with  which  the  Christian  sqavans 
— for  I  cannot  call  them  divines — are  filled  upon  the  very  men- 
tion of  the  existence  of  these  gifts  in  the  Church.  They  are 
like  men  demented,  given  over,  and  toppling  to  their  down- 
fall. The  way  in  which  the  idea  has  been  scouted  and  hooted 
at,  by  what  arc  called  divines,  (but  if  they  would  retain  the 
name  much  longer,  they  must  make  it  good  by  other  means 
than  scandalous  abuse  and  mocking  raillery,)  is  to  me  the  fear- 
fullest  sign  of  the  Protestant  Church,  and  especially  of  the 
Evangelical  sect  in  the  bosom  of  it.  But,  to  return  from  this 
digression. 

H.  Having  set  out  the  largeness  and  the  particularity  of  the 
gift  or  power  which  the  Church  hath  given  to  her,  in  earnest 
of  her  full  inheritance,  and  that  she  may  serve  for  a  witness  of 
that  which  she  preacheth  concerning  the  present  lordship  and 
future  action  of  Christ ;  we  now  come  to  take  a  view  of  the 
same  thing,  not  as  it  lies  in  promise,  but  as  it  is  in  real  exist- 
ence and  was  in  active  exertion  in  the  Church.  And  to  the 
intent  that  we  may  here,  as  always,  have  under  our  feet  the 
firm  continent  of  the  word  of  God,  and  not  sail  widely  in  the 


468  THE  CHURCH: 

waste  of  fanciful  speculations  or  scholastic  inventions,  we  be- 
take ourselves  to  the  12th  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  to  see  there  the  form  and  function  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church,  in  that  state  in  which  Jesus  did  constitute  it,  and 
in  which  He  requireth  us  to  hold  it  fast  till  He  come.  The 
apostle,  speaking  of  the  state  of  the  church  at  Corinth,  and 
taking  in  hand  to  order  it  aright,  and  so  to  leave  upon  the 
record  of  Scripture  the  scheme  of  a  rightly  constituted  church  ; 
and  having  already  discoursed  of  the  true  foundation  of  Christ 
and  Him  crucified,  and  of  holy  discipline,  and  of  separateness 
from  idolatry  and  fornication,  and  of  the  right  administration 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  doth  in  this  chapter  take  up  the  sub- 
ject of  spiritual  gifts,  or  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  in  contradistinction 
from  charity,  which  is  the  more  excellent  way,  and  the  bond 
of  perfectness,  that  spirit  of  complete  holiness  into  which  we 
are  baptized.  And  concerning  these  he  first  asserteth  three 
things  in  general,  to  point  out  the  several  parts  which  the 
several  persons  in  the  Godhead  had  therein.  And,  first,  he 
asserteth  that  the  diversities  of  gifts  which  were  dispersed 
throughout  the  members  of  the  Church,  like  the  diversity  of 
members  in  the  body,  did  not  prove  that  there  were  many 
spirits,  but  that  there  was  one  Spirit,  the  one  life  of  the  whole, 
and  dividing  unto  every  one  according  as  He  will ;  that  no  one 
member  possessed  the  whole  power  of  the  Spirit,  but  only  a 
part  thereof,  and  craved  as  much  the  help  and  ministry  of 
every  other  part  as  they  in  their  turn  did  crave  of  it  ;  Christ 
alone  having  the  seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  spirits  of 
God.  And  therefore  it  is  observed  by  the  apostle,  secondly, 
that  there  are  diversities  of  ministries,  but  the  same  Lord  ;  that 
is  to  say,  in  other  words,  various  persons  into  whose  hands 
the  administration  of  these  gifts  was  committed,  and  who 
were  responsible  for  the  use  of  them  in  behalf  of  the  whole 
body  and  of  the  world  without ;  according  as  it  is  written  in 
the  1 2th  chapter  of  the  Romans  :  "  Having  then  gifts  differ- 
ing according  to  the  grace  that  is  given  to  us,  whether  pro- 
phecy, let  us  prophesy  according  to  the  proportion  of  faith  ; 
or  ministry,  let  us  wait  on  our  ministering  ;  or  he  that  teacheth, 
on  teaching  ;  or  he  that  exhorteth,  on  exhortation :  he  that 
giveth,  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity  ;  he  that  ruleth,  with  dili- 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  469 

gence  ;  he  that  sheweth  mere}',  with  cheerfulness."  The  third 
observation  in  general  is,  that  as  the  substance  of  all  the  gifts 
is  the  one  Spirit,  and  the  administrator  of  them  all  the  one 
Lord ;  so  the  in-worker  of  the  gifts  in  all  the  persons  is  the 
one  and  the  same  God,  whose  Godhead  the  Son  is  filled  with 
in  His  human  nature  to  serve  out  to  men,  while  the  Holy- 
Ghost  carrieth  on  and  supplieth  the  service.  So  that  verily 
these  gifts,  ministries,  and  operations  arc  God  working  by 
means  of  men  what  His  good  pleasure  is  ;  even  as  the  apostle 
declareth  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  (chap.  xiv. 
24,  25  :)  "  But  if  all  prophesy,  and  there  come  in  one  that 
believeth  not,  or  one  unlearned,  he  is  convinced  of  all,  he 
is  judged  of  all  :  and  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made 
manifest ;  and  so  falling  down  on  his  face  he  will  worship 
God,  and  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth."  These  three 
observations  the  apostle  makes,  to  prevent  the  diversity  of 
the  gifts  and  the  ministries  and  the  operations  from  leading 
to  schism,  instead  of  preserving  unity,  as  their  intention  is ; 
his  object  being  the  same  as  is  expressed  more  fully  in  the 
4th  chapter  of  the  Ephesians,  from  the  3d  to  the  17th  verse, 
where  the  unity  standeth  in  these  particulars,  "  one  body,  one 
Spirit,  one  hope  of  your  calling,  one  hope,  one  faith,  one 
baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and 
through  all,  and  in  you  all," — a  sevenfold  and  perfect  unity. 
These  three  observations  are  of  great  price,  as  teaching  us 
that  the  Church,  under  Christ  its  head,  and  with  the  Spirit  for 
its  inspiration,  is  the  one  great  instrument  of  God  in  which 
and  by  which  to  carry  on  all  His  operations  ;  a  temple  for  the 
Eternal  God  to  dwell  in;  a  sufficient  body  for  expressing  all  His 
mind,  and  doing  all  His  will.  This  is  a  very  great,  and  almost 
an  inexpressible  idea  ;  but  it  is  the  only  adequate  idea  of  the 
Church,  considered,  not  in  relation  to  Christ,  but  considered 
in  relation  to  the  incomprehensible  God.  In  relation  to  Christ, 
it  is  as  the  body  to  the  Head ;  but  in  relation  to  God,  it  is  as 
the  whole  body  under  its  Head  to  the  Will.  And  herein  lies 
the  necessity  that  the  Head  of  this  body  should  Himself  be 
adequate  to  the  comprehension  of  God,  filling  His  bosom ; 
otherwise  there  were  no  understanding  how  a  finite  thing 
could  keep  up  communication  and  sympathy,  proportion  and 


470  THE  CHURCH: 

measure,  with  what  is  infinite.  The  whole  mystery  of  redemp- 
tion is  God's  obtaining  for  Himself  such  a  complete  organ  of 
expression  and  of  action,  in  the  finiteness  of  which  the  attri- 
butes of  His  own  infinite  being  might  be  truly  and  fully  ex- 
pressed. To  procure  for  Godhead  such  a  fit  organ,  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  do,  without  departing  or  separating  from 
the  Godhead,  which  is  impossible,  take  connexion  with  the 
creature,  and  from  a  portion  thereof  do  constitute  that  most 
seemly  and  adequate  Shechinah  of  the  Eternal  God.  This 
portion  of  the  creation  is  the  election  ;  and  the  Shechinah,  or 
glorious  habitation  thus  constructed,  is  the  Church ;  and  the 
Head  of  it,  or  holder  of  it  up,  is  Christ ;  and  the  Life  of  it,  or 
the  holder  of  it  together,  is  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  the  mate- 
rials thus  headed  up  and  holden  together  for  a  d\Velling-place, 
and,  so  to  speak,  embodiment  of  God,  are  all  of  the  fallen 
creation ;  of  the  creation  after  it  hath  proved  that  in  itself  is 
neither  strength  nor  aptitude ;  of  the  creation  dissolved  and 
dead ;  to  prove  that  it  needed  both  a  Super-creation  Head 
and  Life,  Holder-up  and  Holder-together.  Ah  me !  what  a 
contemplation  it  is  !  But  we  must  again  betake  ourselves  to 
the  details. 

This  being  the  true  idea  of  the  Church,  Godward  con- 
sidered, it  must  needs  be  that  from  the  beginning  of  its  being 
it  should  put  forth  the  germ  of  its  own  perfection  ;  like  all  the 
inferior  works  of  God,  that  this.  His  chief  work,  should  reveal 
its  constant  law,  and  begin  to  be  in  growth.  Now,  the  Church 
began  to  be  from  the  time  that  Christ  was  glorified  and  became 
the  quickening  Spirit.  As  the  human  race  began  to  be  from 
the  time  Adam  was  endowed  with  the  power  of  generation  and 
received  command  to  multiply  ;  so  the  Church  began  to  be 
from  the  time  that  the  Second  Adam  was  perfected,  and,  by 
receiving  from  the  Father  the  Holy  Ghost,  had  power  by  re- 
generation to  beget  sons  of  God — that  is,  from  the  day  of 
Pentecost — and  therefore  from  this  time  it  should  begin  to 
shew  forth  the  information  and  inworking  of  God  within  it. 
How  it  did  so,  let  us  now  shew  out,  by  pursuing  this  I2th 
chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians ;  and  so  dis- 
cover what  that  is  which  we  are  commanded  to  hold  fast  till 
He  come. 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  471 

The  gifts  which  the  apostle  now  proceeds  to  enumerate  as 
possessed  by  the  Church,  are  in  general  called  "  the  manifes- 
tation of  the  Spirit," — that  is,  the  way  which  the  Spirit  takes 
to  manifest  or  shew  Himself;  to  make  Himself  evident  to 
others,  to  any  one  who  may  chance  to  enter  the  assembly, 
and  hear  and  see  the  things  which  are  said  and  done.  This 
answers  to  our  first  idea,  that  the  Church  is  to  Christ,  while 
He  acteth  in  the  Spirit,  what  the  body  is  to  the  soul — an  in- 
strument by  which  it  reveals  both  its  presence  and  its  manifold 
dispositions  and  energies  :  "  That  by  the  Church  may  be  made 
known  to  the  powers  in  the  heavenly  places  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God."  And  these  manifestations  of  the  Spirit, 
saith  he,  "  are  given  to  every  one  to  profit  withal,"  or  for  pro- 
fitable use ;  not  to  be  hid  in  a  napkin,  or  buried  in  the  earth, 
but  to  be  turned  to  account  and  used  for  the  common  behoof: 
as  it  is  written  by  Peter  concerning  the  same  subject — "As 
every  man  hath  received  the  gift,  even  so  minister  the  same 
one  to  another,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of 
God.  If  any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God; 
if  any  man  minister,  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability  which  God 
giveth  :  that  God  in  all  things  maybe  glorified,  through  Jesus 
Christ,  to  whom  be  praise  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen,"  (i  Pet.  iv.  10,  11.)  Now  to  execute  and  fulfil  this 
purpose  the  constant  presence  of  charity  is  necessary  ;  other- 
wise the  precious  talent  rusts  and  corrodes  its  own  possessor. 
In  order  that  these  gifts  may  be  graces,  the  work  of  regenera- 
tion is  absolutely  necessary — holiness  and  charity — to  bring 
us  into  the  same  devotedness  to  God  and  man  in  which  Christ 
was,  and  to  keep  us  ever  so.  For  want  of  this  it  is  that  many 
possessing  these  gifts  fall  into  schism,  and  some  into  total 
apostasy.  They  are  not  the  best  thing,  but  they  are  some- 
thing, and  that  no  mean  thing,  if  to  exhibit  God  and  Christ 
and  the  Spirit  to  the  world,  and  to  edify  the  Church,  be  no 
mean  thing. 

Then  comes  the  enumeration  of  these  gifts,  waited  upon  by 
divers  ministers  ;  whereof  the  first  two  stand  in  word  ;  the  one 
the  "  word  of  wisdom,"  the  other  the  "  word  of  knowledge  ;  " 
whereof  the  former  refers  to  mysteries  of  doctrine  which 
needed  exposition  ;  the  latter  to  events,  whether  past,  present, 


472  THE  CHURCH: 

or  to  come.  I  gather  from  the  2d  verse  of  the  13th  chapter, 
"  Though  I  have  the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  understand  all 
mysteries  and  all  knowledge,"  that  the  word  of  wisdom  hath 
regard  to  mysteries  ;  and  from  the  8th  verse,  that  the  word  of 
knowledge  hath  respect  to  events  of  this  imperfect  state  and 
temporary  dispensation,  which  shall  be  done  away.  The  two 
occur  in  combination  in  Rom.  xi.  33,  where  the  apostle,  carry- 
ing his  thoughts  to  the  consummation  of  God's  purpose, 
bursts  out  into  ecstasy  over  the  wisdom  of  the  method  and 
the  knowledge  of  the  end — "  Oh  the  depths  both  of  the  wisdom 
and  knowledge  of  God  !"  The  word  of  knowledge  is,  when 
applied  to  the  past,  learjiing;  when  applied  to  the  present, 
knowledge ;  when  applied  to  the  future,  foreknowledge :  and 
it  lays  out  the  particulars  of  which  wisdom  discovers  the 
divine  unity,  the  wonderful  arrangement,  the  relations  of  part 
to  part,  and  their  application  to  the  well-being  of  the  soul, 
and  to  the  moral  duties  of  life.  The  one  tells  the  tale,  the 
other  adds  the  moral.  The  Church  of  Scotland  hath  made 
both  these  standing  ordinances  to  this  day ;  she  hath  held 
these  fast ;  requiring  that  in  every  flock  there  be  one  at  least 
with  the  word  of  wisdom,  endowed  of  the  Spirit,  whose  name 
is  the  bishop,  or  pastor,  or  minister,  and  his  office  to  apply  the 
truth  wisely  to  the  conscience  of  the  people  and  the  exigen- 
cies of  life  ;  another  with  the  word  of  knowledge,  whose  name 
is  the  doctor,  or  teacher,  and  his  business  to  lay  out  the 
history  and  grounds  of  truth  and  error,  and  to  handle  them 
doctrinally,  but  not  to  apply  them.  Of  these  the  latter  is 
considered  as  the  lower  degree.  I  think  this  distinction  is 
substantially  correct,  and  that  the  division  of  office  and  of 
gift  is  a  fine  relic  of  the  primitive  churches  :  would  that  the 
rest  had  been  as  carefully  preserved  !  I  have  often  admired 
the  steadiness  with  which  the  Scottish  people  have  ever  in- 
sisted that  these  gifts  of  the  preacher  and  the  teacher  should 
stand  in  "  word,"  as  they  are  given  in  the  passage  before  us, 
and  not  in  written  and  studied  compositions  ;  insisting  that  it 
is  of  the  essence  of  the  minister's  office  that  he  should  receive 
both  the  matter  and  the  word  from  the  Holy  Ghost.  There- 
fore the  apostle  says,  that  he  taught  wisdom  not  "  in  the 
words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  473 

Ghost  teacheth."  For,  according  to  the  text,  there  is  in  the 
Church  a  gift  "to  speak  wisdom,"  and  another  gift  "to  speak 
knowledge  ;"  and  of  the  nine  gifts,  only  these  two  have  the 
character  of  "  word  :  "  and  we  may  therefore  well  believe  that 
this  is  of  their  essence  ;  that  "  the  word  "  is  a  part  of  the  gift, 
and  that  those  who  hold  for  a  verbal  inspiration  of  the  matter 
of  Scripture  are  correct.  These  two  gifts  are,  however,  not 
the  only  ones  which  stood  in  utterance  by  the  mouth,  which 
belongeth  also  to  "prophecy."  But  there  is  this  difference, 
as  I  judge ;  that  the  prophet  had  not  the  word  given  to  him, 
but  only  the  matter,  with  the  high  gift  of  embodying  it  in  the 
form  known  by  the  name  prophecy,  which  we  shall  here- 
after consider  ;  whereas  the  other  two  had  the  matter  brought 
to  them  in  the  form  of  word,  and  were  only  the  mouth  to 
give  it  utterance.  By  these  Christ  shewed  forth  His  wisdom 
to  unlock  all  mysteries,  and  His  knowledge  of  all  events ; 
and  His  capacity  of  embodying  them  by  the  word  of  others, 
from  whom  He  was  separated  personally  by  being  altogether 
out  of  the  world :  shewing  to  us  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
to  bring  THE  WORD  from  the  Father,  and  utter  it  in  the 
world  by  means  of  men ;  and  teaching  how,  in  the  age 
to  come.  He  will  use  men  for  the  conveyancers  of  His  word 
— or,  rather,  the  Spirit  for  the  conveyancer,  and  men  for  the 
utterers  of  it,  in  whatever  region  of  the  world  their  appointed 
station  may  be.  No  doubt  it  was  this  gift  which  furnished 
and  fitted  the  evangelists  and  the  apostles  for  their  work  of 
inditing  the  Scriptures  ;  the  former  having  the  word  of  know- 
ledge, to  recall  and  narrate  events ;  the  latter  the  word  of 
wisdom,  to  decide  questions  which  had  arisen  in  the  Church, 
and  give  full  counsels  for  all  cases  that  should  arise. 

Next  to  these  is  faith  :  "  To  another  faith,  by  the  same 
Spirit."  This  is  not  saving  faith,  or  the  "  one  faith,"  without 
which  a  man  cannot  be  saved  ;  which  is  not  a  particular  gift 
conferred  upon  one  and  not  upon  another  member  of  the 
body,  but  the  common  possession  of  them  all ;  and  is  of  that 
complete,  and  not  partial,  gift  into  which  we  are  baptized, 
and  by  which  we  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  the 
Lord  in  the  Eucharist.  Of  what  kind  this  faith  is  we  have 
described  to  us  in  the   1 3th  chapter,  by  direct  contrast  with 


474  THE  CHURCH: 

that  charity  which  is  not  partial,  but  common ;  which  is  not 
accidental,  but  essential  to  a  Christian.  When  I  say  acci- 
dental, I  would  not  have  it  to  be  understood  as  if  I  regarded 
the  possession  of  these  spiritual  gifts  as  matter  of  indifference 
to  the  Church  whether  she  have  them  or  not ;  for  I  believe 
them  to  be  her  talents  to  trade  upon,  her  setting-up  and 
outfit  in  the  present  world,  for  probation  of  her  faithfulness 
and  adjudication  of  her  future  reward.  The  parable  of  the 
talents  has  these  gifts,  as  T  judge,  in  view.  It  is  not  natural 
gifts,  but  spiritual  gifts  of  the  kingdom,  which  are  there 
treated  of  When  therefore  it  so  happens,  as  at  this  time 
amongst  us  Protestants,  that  the  Church  not  only  doth  not 
desire  to  possess,  but  doth  utterly  abjure  their  being  respon- 
sible for  these  gifts,  she  doth  worse  than  the  man  with  the 
one  talent,  and  shall  receive  her  reward,  if  she  repent  not, 
and  give  not  heed  to  the  witness  which  is  now  raised  in  her 
ears  concerning  her  endowments.  The  faith  here  spoken  of, 
and  which  I  call  accidental  and  peculiar,  not  spiritual  and 
catholic,  because  one  Christian  may  have  it  and  another  may 
not  have  it,  is  the  same  spoken  of  in  chap.  xiii.  2 — "  And 
though  I  have  all  faith,  so  that  I  could  remove  mountains." 
And  this  again  carries  us,  as  by  a  direct  quotation,  to  our 
Lord's  declaration  to  His  disciples,  twice  repeated — once 
upon  the  occasion  of  His  healing  the  devil-possessed  child, 
(Matt.  xvii.  20,)  the  other  of  His  cursing  the  barren  fig-tree, 
(Matt.  xxi.  21) — "If  ye  have  faith  like  a  grain  of  mustard 
seed,  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain.  Remove  hence  to  yonder 
place,  and  it  shall  remove ;  and  nothing  shall  be  impossible 
unto  you."  This  is  what  divines  call  the  faith  of  miracles,  as 
distinguished  from  saving  faith.  And  yet  it  is  not  the  gift  of 
miracles,  which  may  be  divided  from  it,  and  is  divided  from 
it  in  the  text,  and  given  to  another.  What  then  is  it .''  I 
think  it  is  that  which  hath  the  same  relation  to  the  actions  of 
the  Spirit  that  word  hath  to  His  thoughts ;  it  is  the  strong 
confidence  in  Christ's  power,  in  the  presence  of  which  power 
it  is  done,  and  without  which  it  cannot  be  done.  But,  while 
this  gift  of  faith  is  the  substratum  upon  which  the  various 
actings  of  power  that  follow  do  rest,  it  hath  doubtless  some- 
thing in  itself  distinctive  enough  to  form  a  gift,  without  any 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  475 

addition  of  healing,  or  miracles,  or  tongues ;  which  appears 
to  be,  the  power  of  relying  upon  the  word  which  hath  been 
spoken  out  of  the  gift  of  wisdom  and  of  knowledge.  To 
utter  a  word  is  not  to  believe  :  when  a  man  hath  been  the 
tongue  of  the  Spirit,  he  hath  done  his  part ;  it  is  the  part  of 
another  to  fasten  hold  upon  it,  and  to  keep  it  laid  up  in  his 
faith,  and  to  be  established  upon  it,  and  to  be  the  stay  of  the 
Church  in  adversities.  As  the  man  with  the  word  of  wisdom 
rises  up  in  perplexities,  and  gives  forth  the  resolution  of  God  ; 
so  the  man  with  faith  rises  up  in  adversities,  and  recalls  the 
memory  and  reawakens  the  faith  of  things  uttered  by  God. 
These  men  of  faith  are  the  forlorn  hope  of  the  army,  who 
never  lose  heart,  but  believe  all  things  possible  to  God.  Such 
men  I  know,  who  cannot  utter  a  syllable  without  a  stammer- 
ing lip,  but  have  tenfold  the  faith  of  others,  who  can  speak 
like  the  oracles  of  God.  This  gift  of  faith  I  look  upon  as 
being  in  the  Church  what  indomitable  resolution  and  never- 
failing  confidence  is  in  the  natural  character  of  some  men  ;  it 
sticks  at  nothing  which  God  hath  said,  but  believes  its  very 
jots  and  tittles  :  it  fears  nothing  which  God  in  His  providence 
sends,  but  ever  says  to  the  children  of  Israel,  Go  fonvard. 
By  having  such  an  organ  of  the  Spirit  in  the  body,  Christ 
shews  that  His  Church  hath  capacity  of  believing  all  that  He 
can  say,  and  therefore  is  a  fit  instrument  for  executing  all 
that  He  can  desire.  The  order  of  God's  providence  is,  first, 
word  ;  then,  faith  in  Him  who  hears  it :  then,  execution  by  the 
means  of  them  who  have  believed.  And  while  it  stands  lin- 
gering in  the  stage  of  faith,  the  Lord  bringeth  the  most  faith- 
trying  occurrences,  so  that  it  should  seem  to  some  utterly  im- 
possible to  accomplish  the  thing  ;  and  He  ever  saith,  "  Except 
ye  believe,  ye  cannot  be  established  : "  faith  bears  the  fiery 
proof,  and  in  due  time  receives  the  reward  of  accomplish- 
ment. To  this  intrepidity  of  faith,  God  calleth  some  with  a 
special  calling. 

The  next  is  "  the  gifts  of  healing,  by  the  same  Spirit."  Of 
this  we  have  already  spoken,  when  viewing  this  subject  under 
the  aspect  of  promise.  It  is  the  fifth  of  the  signs  of  the  Re- 
deemer and  the  complete  redemption  :  "  Ye  shall  lay  your 
hands  on  the  sick,  and  they  shall  recover."     And  certain  per- 


47^  THE  CHURCH: 

sons  in  the  Church  were  intrusted  with  the  dispensation 
thereof  unto  the  whole  body,  and  unto  those  that  were  with- 
out :  for  these  gifts  were  not  to  be  hoarded  up  within  the 
Church,  but  to  be  traded  with  ;  they  were  for  the  confirma- 
tion of  that  word  to  every  creature  under  heaven,  to  whom 
the  word  was  preached,  not  by  an  appeal  to  a  miracle — which 
is,  in  respect  of  truth,  no  more  discernment  than  the  appeal 
to  arms  is  in  respect  of  justice — but  by  a  demonstration  in 
the  act  of  that  thing  which  they  preached  in  word.  The 
word  preached  is,  that  Christ  hath  redeemed  men  from  the 
power  of  death  ;  and  in  sign  thereof  we  do  in  His  name  heal 
all  manner  of  diseases,  and  upon  occasion  raise  the  dead,  (as 
is  recorded  both  of  Peter  and  Paul  :)  and  the  conclusion  is, 
that  the  name  of  Christ  is  indeed  able  to  effect  those  things 
preached.  The  sign  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  thing  preached, 
and  by  being  so  confirms  it.  It  is  not  an  appeal  to  blind  power, 
but  it  is  an  appeal  to  Jesus  to  confirm  the  truth  preached,  by 
giving  a  sign  of  His  possessing  this  power  which  we  assign 
to  Him,  and  a  first-fruits  of  that  action  which  we  preach 
Him  about  to  perform.  It  is  not  by  the  transmission  of  this 
through  eighteen  centuries  of  tradition,  that  the  unlearned 
world  are  to  be  convinced — a  process  by  which,  I  will  venture 
to  say,  that  none  but  a  few  antiquaries  were  ever  convinced ; 
but  it  is  by  the  abiding  of  them  in,  and  the  putting  of  them  forth 
by,  the  Church,  wherever  and  so  long  as  she  is  established, 
until  Christ  come,  that  the  world  is  to  be  taught  that  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  is  the  world's  gracious  Healer,  and  wise  Teacher, 
and  merciful  Redeemer,  and  righteous  Governor.  It  is  not 
by  putting  a  book  into  every  man's  hand,  of  the  genuineness 
and  authenticity  of  which  it  takes  no  mean  store  of  learning 
to  be  convinced,  but  it  is  by  a  continuous  Church  holding 
forth  the  word  of  the  gospel  of  life  to  the  nations,  and  attest- 
ing the  truth  of  what  they  declare  concerning  Jesus,  by  calling 
His  name  over  all  distressed  nature,  and  giving  it  redemption 
and  joy.  This  is  what  the  Church  was  intended  to  be,  God's 
witnesses  of  Christ  to  every  nation  and  every  generation, 
until  He  should  send  Him  to  accomplish  all  which  had  been 
preached  for  a  witness.  But  now,  lo  !  the  Bible  Society  is  our 
church,  and  the  Bible  is  our  God  !     These  gifts  of  healing 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  All 

bespeak  Christ's  mercy  unto,  and  His  power  over,  all  flesh. 
How  oft  is  it  said  in  the  Gospels,  "And  he  healed  them  all !" 
And  Peter  and  Paul  had  a  still  more  indiscriminate  ministry ; 
for  to  them  were  brought  handkerchiefs  from  the  sick,  that 
they  might  touch  them  ;  and  the  infirm  were  laid  by  the  way, 
that  the  shadow  of  the  apostle  might  overshadow  some  of 
them.  That  dispensation  of  a  redeeming  providence  which 
Judea  had  for  three  years  and  a  half  in  the  person  of  the 
Lord,  the  whole  world  was  intended  to  have  in  the  Churqh, 
and  would  have  had,  but  for  our  unfaithfulness  to  our  Master, 
our  self-sufficiency  in  ourselves,  and  our  unmercifulness  to  the 
world.  Forgetting  for  what  end  we  were  elected,  even  to  shew 
forth  the  power  of  Him  who  hath  called  us,  we  grew  vain  of 
our  election,  and  rioted  in  the  pride  of  it,  and  became  hard- 
hearted ;  and  did  such  things  and  held  such  opinions,  under 
the  covert  of  that  name  election,  as  many  are  now  doing  who 
deny  the  universal  love  of  God,  and  the  real  work  of  Christ 
to  condemn  sin  in  the  flesh.  We  are  acting  over  again  the 
shameful  history  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  are  preparing 
for  a  more  terrible  tragedy  than  theirs. 

Next  comes  "  the  working  of  miracles."  The  passage  in 
Hebrews,  (chap.  ii.  4,)  which  gives  a  brief  enumeration  of  these 
works,  divides  them  thus :  "  Signs,  and  wonders,  and  divers 
miracles,  and  gifts  (distributions)  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Of 
these  four,  the  third  is  that  now  under  consideration.  The 
first,  "  signs,"  we  have  treated  of  in  the  foregoing  exposition 
of  the  last  verses  of  Mark,  "  These  signs  shall  follow  them  that 
believe."  A  sign  is  properly  a  token  in  which  the  thing  sig- 
nified can  be  recognised ;  and  in  those  four  particulars,  we 
shewed,  is  to  be  recognised  the  whole  salvation  of  soul,  body, 
and  inheritance,  which  we  preach.  The  "  wonders"  are  almost 
constantly  coupled  with  the  signs,  and  in  one  place  distin- 
guished from  them  :  Acts  ii.  19,  "  And  I  will  shew  wonders  in 
heaven  above,  and  signs  in  the  earth  beneath."  And  some- 
times "  miracles,"  or  powers,  are  added  to  both ;  as  in  re- 
counting the  proof  of  Christ's  mission  in  the  same  chapter, 
and  Paul's  justifying  his  own  mission,  (2  Cor.  xii.  12.)  It  is 
hard  to  distinguish  these  things,  and  I  know  not  whether  it 
can  be  done.     Our  translators  have  not  done  it,  and  perhaps 


47S  THE  CHURCH : 

they  are  right  If,  however,  I  were  to  venture  a  distinction, 
it  would  be,  that  the  wonder  is  something  extraordinary  ex- 
hibited to  the  sight — as  the  turning  of  the  sun  into  darkness, 
and  the  moon  into  blood  ;  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the 
temple,  and  of  the  rocks,  and  the  bringing  on  of  darkness ; 
— and  the  miracle,  or  power,  is  the  doing  of  something  mighty 
beyond  all  comparison  ;  as  the  calming  of  the  storm,  or  the 
laying  of  the  deep,  or  the  multiplying  of  loaves,  or  the  chang- 
ing of  water  into  wine  :  although  both  of  these  are  called  signs 
in  the  original,  as  is  also  the  healing  of  the  lame  man  by 
Peter  and  John  ;  but  throughout  all  that  discourse  in  the  i  ith 
chapter  of  Matthew,  for  reproof  of  the  cities  where  His  mighty 
works  had  been  chiefly  done,  the  word  used  is  "  powers,  or 
miracles."  Wonders  I  take  to  be  remarkable  occurrences 
which  yet  contradict  no  law  of  nature,  as  Elisha's  bringing  fire 
from  heaven  ;  but  miracles  are  a  strong  resistance,  suspension, 
and  turning  back  of  nature's  fixed  powers.  Yet  all  of  these, 
both  the  wonders  and  miracles,  being  interpreted  aright,  are 
signs  of  that  kingdom  of  heaven  which  we  preach  as  about  to 
be  revealed  under  the  government  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.  Besides  these  three,  there  is  a  fourth  classifi- 
cation in  this  passage  of  the  Hebrews,  which  is  entitled  "gifts 
(or  distributions)  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  the  like  addition 
do  we  find  the  apostle  Paul  making,  when  enumerating  the 
works  of  God  in  and  by  him.  The  passage  is  in  Rom.  xv. 
19,  and  somewhat  obscured  in  our  translation  :  literally  it  is, 
"  In  power  of  signs  and  wonders,  in  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  ;"  another  form  of  power.  Accordingly  we  find  that 
those  same  apostles  who  were  required  to  wait  for  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  in  order  to  receive  "  power  from  on  high,"  had  at 
that  time,  and  during  their  ministry,  possessed  power  to  heal 
the  sick,  to  cast  out  devils,  and  to  trample  upon  all  the  power 
of  the  enemy :  "  Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise  the 
dead,  cast  out  devils."  This  they  possessed,  and  yet  did  they 
not  possess  that  power  or  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  they 
received  on  Pentecost.  They  then  did  such  works  as  He  did, 
but  they  were  after  Pentecost  to  do  greater  works  than  these, 
through  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  He  was  to  receive 
by  going  to  the  Father,  and  to  shed  down  upon  them.     To 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  479 

this  new  power,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  apostle's  fourth 
distribution  in  the  2d  of  the  Hebrews,  and  second  in  the 
15th  of  the  Romans,  hath  reference.  Our  inquiry  at  present, 
however,  is  into  the  gift  of  miracles,  which  was  a  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Spirit  given  to  a  certain  order  in  the  Church. 
This  order  was  instituted  in  the  body  on  purpose  to  set 
forth  Christ's  mighty  power  to  withstand,  to  turn  again,  and 
to  direct  for  the  ends  of  grace  and  goodness,  those  potent 
springs  of  nature,  those  powers  of  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  which  Satan  hath  succeeded  in  distorting  from  their 
true  and  right  intention  to  an  evil  use :  where  famine  is, 
to  make  plenty  ;  where  blindness  is,  to  give  sight ;  and 
lameness  strength,  and  death  life  :  that  men  might  know  that 
cause  and  effect  is  only  an  appointment  or  permission  of  God 
while  it  pleases  Him  ;  and  that  the  laws  of  the  material  world 
are  not  necessary,  but  under  the  control  and  in  the  hands 
of  our  merciful  Redeemer.  If  the  Church  had  been  still 
possessed  of  this  memorial  and  foreshewing  of  that  great  re- 
volution in  nature  which  is  to  be  effected  at  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  there  would  not  have  been  this  universal  feeling  and 
outcry,  "  All  things  have  continued  as  they  were  since  the 
beginning:"  this  bondage  of  the  will  of  man  to  the  fatality  of 
cause  and  effect,  and  all  those  speculations,  which  have  so 
strengthened  scepticism,  concerning  the  possibility  or  impossi- 
bility of  attesting  a  miracle,  would  have  been  prevented  ;  and 
the  present  entire  unbelief  of  a  miracle  being  ever  again, 
would,  as  ashamed,  hide  its  face,  instead  of  exposing  itself  in 
all  public  places.  This  power  of  miracles  must  either  be 
speedily  revived  in  the  Church,  or  there  will  be  a  universal 
dominion  of  the  mechanical  philosophy;  and  faith  will  be 
fairly  expelled,  to  give  place  to  the  law  of  cause  and  effect 
acting  and  ruling  in  the  world  of  mind,  as  it  doth  in  the  world 
of  sense.  What  now  is  preaching  become,  but  the  skill  of  a 
man  to  apply  causes  which  may  produce  a  certain  known 
effect  upon  a  congregation  ">. — so  much  of  argument,  so  much 
of  eloquence,  so  much  of  pathos,  so  much  of  doctrine,  so  much 
of  morality  ;  and  all  to  bring  the  audience  into  a  certain  frame 
of  mind,  and  so  dismiss  them  well  wrought  upon  by  the 
preacher  and  well  pleased  with  themselves.     The  effectual 


48o  THE  CHURCH: 

check  to  all  this  would  be,  to  dispute  with  the  enemy  in  his 
fortress,  to  try  conclusions  with  the  law  of  cause  and  effect  in 
astronomy,  natural  philosophy,  chemistry,  or  any  branch  of 
natural  science,  where  it  holds  itself  supreme :  to  stop  the  sun, 
like  Joshua  ;  to  make  him  travel  back,  like  Isaiah  ;  to  walk 
upon  the  water,  like  our  Lord ;  or  to  handle  the  viper,  like 
the  apostle  Paul.  The  very  existence  of  a  will  the  cause  of 
itself,  is  begun  not  only  to  be  doubted,  but  to  be  denied.  It 
also  is  looked  upon  as  a  substance,  under  the  common  bond- 
age of  cause  and  effect ;  and  God  himself  is  looked  upon 
merely  as  a  Great  First  Cause.  I  know  nothing  able  to  de- 
throne this  monster  from  the  throne  of  God,  which  it  hath 
usurped,  but  the  reawakening  of  the  Church  to  her  long-for- 
gotten privilege  of  working  miracles.  The  miracle-workers  in 
the  Church  are  Christ's  hand,  to  shew  the  strength  that  is  in 
Him  :  the  healers  of  diseases  are  His  almoners,  to  shew  what 
pity  and  compassion  are  in  Him  :  the  faith-administrators  are 
His  lion-heart,  to  shew  how  mighty  and  fearless  He  is  :  and  the 
utterers  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  His  mind,  to  shew  how 
rich  and  capacious  it  is.  They  do  all  contain,  and  exhibit 
and  minister  to  the  world,  some  portion  of  that  fulness  which 
is  in  Him,  and  which  He  alone  is  capable  of  holding  in  one 
subsistence  ;  which,  when  it  enters  into  others,  must  prove 
the  occupation  and  the  honour  and  the  ornament  of  many 
persons. 

We  now  pass  into  another  region,  distinguished  both  from 
the  more  excellent  way  of  charity  and  from  spiritual  gifts,  in 
these  words  of  the  14th  chapter,  "  Follow  after  charity,  and 
desire  spiritual  gifts,  but  rather  that  ye  may  prophesy."  And 
throughout  the  whole  of  that  chapter  he  dwells  upon  this  gift 
of  prophecy,  which  is  now  before  us,  with  a  special  delight,  as 
the  edification  of  the  Church :  "  But  he  that  prophesieth, 
speaketh  unto  men  to  edification,  and  exhortation,  and  com- 
fort," (ver.  3  ;)  and  nothing  seems  he  to  have  had  so  much  at 
heart  as  that  all  should  prophesy  :  "  I  would  that  ye  all  spake 
with  tongues,  but  rather  that  ye  prophesied  ; "  and  again, 
"  But  if  all  prophesy,  and  there  come  in  one  that  believeth 
not,  or  one  unlearned,  he  is  convinced  of  all,  he  is  judged  of 
all:  and  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made  manifest ;  and 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  481 

so,  falling  down  on  his  face,  he  will  worship  God,  and  report  that 
God  is  in  you  of  a  truth,"  (ver.  24,  25.)  What  is  this  gift,  of 
which  the  apostle  maketh  such  high  account  ?  It  is  evidently- 
very  different  from  what  is  commonly  understood  by  prophesy- 
ing, as  the  mere  foretelling  of  future  events,  because  it  is 
"  unto  men  for  edification  and  exhortation  and  comfort."  But 
if  that  vulgar  idea  of  prognostication  be  meant  to  represent 
the  true  character  of  a  prophet  of  the  Old  Testament,  nothing 
is  so  insufficient.  Is  the  office  of  Moses  or  Elias,  of  Isaiah  or 
Jeremiah,  described  by  saying  that  they  foretold  future  events  .'' 
I  trow  not.  Their  office  standeth  in  this,  that  they  were  God's 
mouth  to  men,  fitted  and  furnished  for  uttering  His  own  mind 
in  adequate  expressions,  and  for  standing  in  the  breach  be- 
tween the  Church  and  the  world,  between  the  world  and  its 
destruction.  Ah  me  :  what  a  mischief  hath  been  done  by 
these  wild  schismatics,  who,  in  their  sectarian  zeal  to  repress 
the  free  inquiries  of  the  Church  into  the  prophets,  have  dared 
to  propagate  it  among  their  weak  adherents,  that  these  books 
of  the  prophets  are  only  for  the  curious  speculators  into  the 
future  !  Night  unto  you,  O  ye  misleaders  of  the  people  !  If 
ye  return  not  at  the  watchman's  voice,  the  night  and  thick 
darkness  abide  you :  any  little  twilight  you  now  grope  in,  will 
soon  pass  into  the  deepest,  darkest  midnight.  O  my  mis- 
guided brethren  !  I  tell  you,  the  prophets  are  the  utterers  of 
the  word  of  God  for  the  weal  of  man.  None  of  their  writings 
is  of  any  private  interpretation,  to  single  men,  or  generations 
of  men,  or  particular  ages ;  but  to  the  Church  catholic  and 
universal ;  for  they  spake  not  after  the  will  of  men,  but  as 
they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  are  very  profit- 
able for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  and  for  instruc- 
tion in  righteousness.  They  are  most  profitable  for  holiness, 
both  personal,  ecclesiastical,  and  national.  They  reveal  God 
in  all  His  fulness  and  variety  of  being.  They  speak  in  human 
ears  the  strains  of  heaven.  Oh  !  how  very  sublime,  how  very 
pathetic,  how  very  moral,  how  very  divine  they  are !  It  is 
the  richest  tissue  of  discourse  that  was  ever  woven.  The  poet, 
the  orator,  the  merchant,  the  statesman,  the  divine,  every 
form  of  spiritual  workman,  will  find  the  instruments,  and  the 
measures,  and  the  rules,  and  the  chief  performances  of  his  art, 
VOL.  V.  2  H 


482  THE  CHURCH: 

therein.  How  many-sided  are  the  prophets !  How  they 
stretch  athwart  the  middle  space  between  heaven  and  earth, 
lying  all  abroad  in  the  most  varied  beauty !  I  am  grieved, 
sore  pained  at  my  heart,  that  the  affections  of  men  should 
have  departed  away  from  such  a  feast  of  fat  things.  I  can- 
not understand  it.  It  did  not  use  to  be  so.  In  my  boyish 
days,  when  the  firesides  of  the  Scottish  peasantry  were  my 
favourite  haunts,  and  converse  with  the  gray-headed  elders 
of  the  Church  my  delight,  their  prayers  were  almost  ex- 
clusively drawn  from  the  psalms  and  the  prophets.  Have 
I  not  heard  them  use  those  blessed  passages  with  a  savour 
and  unction  which  indicated  both  intelligence  and  full  feel- 
ing !  Is  the  mind  of  man  departed  into  the  sear  and  yel- 
low leaf  ?  Is  there  to  be  no  second  spring  }  Are  we  ever 
to  feed  on  the  garbage  of  the  magazines  and  the  religious 
newspapers  .''  God  forbid  !  That  rich  and  copious  vein  of 
rendering  God's  messages  in  forms  of  thought  and  language 
worthy  of  Him,  and  powerful  over  the  hearts  and  souls  of 
men,  which  prophecy  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Old  Testament 
prophets,  the  apostle  wisheth  all  the  Church  to  study  to  pos- 
sess ;  and  being  attained,  he  counts  it  of  an  unspeakable  price 
in  the  ecclesiastical  economy  ;  insomuch,  he  saith,  that  if  they 
were  all  thus  to  speak  as  from  the  heart  of  God  to  the  heart 
of  man,  and  there  come  into  the  assembly  one  that  believeth 
not,  or  one  unlearned,  he  says  he  cannot  fail  to  be  convinced 
and  judged  of  them  all.  What  a  heart-searching,  truth-tell- 
ing thing  must  this  prophecy,  then,  have  been  }  Such  a  thing 
must  prophesying  have  been — clear,  true,  warm,  and  tender  ; 
fresh  from  the  heart ;  redolent  with  the  affections  of  God  to 
sinful  men  ;  piercing  and  penetrating,  yet  not  appalling,  but 
cleansing  and  comforting,  to  the  conscience.  And  this  is 
what  our  preaching  is  intended  to  stand  for }  Wretched  sub- 
stitute !  It  seems  to  me  that  this  gift  of  prophesying,  which 
the  Church  are  by  the  apostle  called  upon  to  covet  above  all 
other  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  is  the  same  gift  which  was  ministered 
by  the  Old  Testament  prophets, — the  faculty  of  shewing  to 
all  men  their  true  estate  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  their  near- 
ness to  His  judgments,  and  the  way  of  escape  ;  the  faculty  of 
doing  for  persons  what  they  did  for  kingdoms  and  cities ; 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  483 

foretelling  being  a  part,  but  only  a  part  of  it ;  yet  that  to  give 
warning  of  which  the  spirit  of  the  prophet  is  stirred  up  to  put 
forth  all  the  powers  and  energies  of  the  persuasive  Spirit  of 
God,  that  the  evil  may  be  avoided  and  the  good  attained. 
Such  prophecies  had  gone  before  upon  Timothy,  and  by  them 
he  is  exhorted  by  the  apostle  to  war  a  good  warfare ;  and  the 
gift  is  said  to  be  given  unto  him  by  prophecy,  as  well  as  by  the 
laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery,  (i  Tim.  i.  18,  iv.  14.) 
Joining  this  with  the  declaration  quoted  above,  that  prophecy 
was  fitted  to  convince  and  judge  any  stranger  who  by  acci- 
dent might  come  in,  and  to  lay  open  the  secrets  of  his  heart, 
so  that  he  should  be  forced  to  fall  down  and  worship,  as  per- 
ceiving that  God's  eye  was  in  them,  and  that  things  were 
known  to  them  which  no  one  but  God  and  his  own  conscience 
could  know^  what  can  I  say  of  this  gift  of  the  Spirit  less  than 
that  it  was  God  telling,  by  His  chosen  servant,  His  own  know- 
ledge of  the  secrets  of  a  man's  heart,  that  he  might  confess 
his  sin  and  find  forgiveness  of  it }    One  trembles  to  think  that 
such  a  power  should  be  given  to  men  of  looking  into  men : 
but  if  this  power  be  with  God,  and  He  have  given  it  to  Christ, 
who  possesseth  those  seven  eyes  which  are  the  seven  spirits  of 
God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth  ;  and  if  the  Church  be  Christ's 
functionary,  through  which  to  express  a  manifestation  of  every 
attribute  which  He  possesseth ;  then  is  it  to  be  expected  that 
here  should  also  be  found  in  the  Church  an  order  of  men  to 
ise  Christ's  eyes  with  Christ's  heart,  and  speak  forth  to  the 
dscovered  and  detected  sinner  such  strains  as  these :    "  O 
Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest   the    prophets,   and 
sbnest  them  which  are  sent  unto  thee,  how  often  would  I 
have  gathered  thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth 
he-  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not ! "  (Matt. 
xxii.  37  ;)  "Oh  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a 
fouitain  of  tears,  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the 
slaii  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  !"  (Jer.  ix.  i)  ;  "As  I  live, 
saitl  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked, 
but  rather  that  he  should  turn  and  live :  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  ; 
why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel!"     This,  I  think,  is  the 
true  ilea  of  the  gift  of  prophecy, — that  it  was  Christ  speaking 
forth  4is  love  and  His  earnestness  and  His  knowledge,  to 


484  THE  CHURCH: 

deliver  each  man  from  the  roots  of  bitterness  that  are  within 
him,  and  to  warn  him  of  the  certain  consequences  which  will 
ensue  upon  the  evil  course  he  is  now  following.  The  word  of 
wisdom  hath  reference  to  truth,  and  the  word  of  knowledge 
to  faith,  but  prophecy  hath  reference  to  persons.  It  is  for 
building  up  and  comforting  the  Church,  for  converting  sinners 
from  the  error  of  their  ways,  and  warning  the  world  of  the 
evil  to  come.  And  that  such  a  power  is  in  the  Spirit  is  as 
sure  as  that  it  is  in  Christ ;  and  that  He  hath  promised  it  to 
His  Church  is  not  only  proved  from  its  place  in  this  enume- 
ration, but  it  is  also  clear  from  the  express  promise  that  the 
Spirit  will  shew  us  things  to  come  ;  from  the  example  of  the 
prophecies  which  went  before  on  Timothy,  and  of  the  prophet 
who  bound  himself  with  Paul's  girdle,  and  prophesied  that 
the  like  would  they  do  at  Jerusalem  to  him  who  owned  it. 
Our  Lord  shewed  many  examples  of  the  like  personal  pro- 
phesyings,  over  Peter,  and  Judas,  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebe- 
dee ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  the  primitive  Church  was  all-rife 
with  this  gift  of  foreshewing  to  persons  the  future  destinies 
which  hung  over  them,  and  grounding  thereon  the  same  variety 
of  all-inclusive  discourse  which  the  old  prophets  used  towards 
cities  and  nations. 

"  To  another,  discerning  of  spirits."  What  this  gift,  or 
talent,  committed  to  the  keeping  of  the  Church,  is,  we  learn 
from  the  First  Epistle  of  John,  where  he  directeth  the  Churc 
how  to  put  it  to  use  :  "  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit,  buf 
try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God :  because  many  falst 
prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world,"  (i  John  iv.  i.)  Fron 
this  we  learn  that  the  spirits  which  were  to  be  tried  or  proved 
spake  by  the  mouths  of  false  prophets,  and  prompted  then 
to  utter  things  untrue  and  unholy.  An  example  of  this  ki^d 
we  have  in  the  22nd  chapter  of  the  First  Book  of  Kin^s, 
where,  all  the  prophets  of  Ahab  having  prophesied  that  he 
should  go  up  to  Ramoth-gilead,  Micaiah,  the  prophet  of  the 
Lord,  explaineth  the  manner  in  which  they  had  been  de- 
ceived and  had  deceived  him,  in  a  passage  which  opeleth 
much  insight  into  the  spiritual  world;  teaching  how, God 
useth  the  ministry  of  evil  spirits  in  order  to  pervert  froit  the 
way  of  truth  those  who  have  loved  darkness  rather/ than 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  485 

light;  "sending  them  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  be- 
lieve a  lie  ;"  and  how  these  spirits  take  possession  of  wicked 
prophets  who  have  not  served  the  Spirit  of  Truth  faithfully, 
and  possess  them  with  a  word  of  falsehood ;  and  how  many 
of  these  prophets  of  lies  may  at  once  be  under  the  influence 
of  one  of  those  unclean  spirits.  When  the  Lord,  in  the  7th 
and  24th  chapters  of  Matthew,  and  Peter,  in  the  2d  chapter 
of  his  Second  Epistle,  warn  the  Church  of  false  prophets  that 
should  arise,  they  do  not  mean  merely  erroneous  and  deceiv- 
ing men,  but  men  possessed  with  a  lying  spirit.  Indeed,  I 
believe  that  in  all  cases  the  word  prophet,  in  the  Scriptures, 
signifies  a  man  speaking  in  the  power  of  another  spirit  than 
his  own.  A  true  prophet  speaketh  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  a  lying  prophet  speaketh  in  the  power  of 
an  unclean  spirit.  That  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the 
name  prophet  in  the  New  Testament,  as  in  the  Old,  is 
further  manifest  from  the  language  of  the  apostle :  "  The 
spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  prophets,"  (i  Cor. 
xiv.  "i)!?)  Now,  in  the  passage  of  John's  First  Epistle,  under 
consideration,  the  Church  is  required  to  try  those  spirits  with 
which  the  prophets  spake,  whether  they  were  of  God  01;  not ; 
and  there  must,  therefore,  have  been  a  gift  given  to  the 
Church  for  this  end,  and  persons  to  whom  it  was  given  to 
exercise  it.  The  prophets  tried  men,  but  these  men  tried  the 
prophets.  The  word  "  discernment  derives  some  illustration 
from  the  14th  chapter,  where  it  is  written,  in  the  29th  verse, 
"  Let  two  or  three  prophets  speak,  and  let  the  others  dis- 
cern :  and  if  to  another  sitting  by  there  be  a  revelation,  let 
the  first  be  silent :  for  ye  can  all  prophesy  one  by  one,  that 
all  may  learn  and  all  be  comforted ;  and  the  spirits  of  the 
prophets  are  in  subjection  to  the  prophets  ;  for  not  of  tumult 
is  he  the  God,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  churches  of  the 
saints."  This  passage  shews  us  that  the  discerning  of  spirits 
was  a  faculty  widely  diffused  in  the  Church,  and  required  to 
be  in  continual  exercise ;  and  that  the  prophets,  in  the  things 
which  they  uttered,  were  carefully  and  affectionately  watched 
by  the  Church,  and  guarded  from  falling  under  the  sugges- 
tions of  the  wicked  spirits :  and  if,  while  one  of  them  was 
speaking,  there  should  have  been  any  revelation  to  this  effect, 


486  THE  CHURCH: 

he  was  commanded  to  stop  till  he  heard  it,  lest  by  any  means 
he  might  mislead  the  brethren  into  error.  It  is  very  beauti- 
ful to  observe,  how  no  gift  had  a  completeness  in  itself,  but 
wanted  the  neighbourhood  and  help  of  another.  The  prophet 
needed  the  guardianship  of  the  discerner  of  spirits,  and  the 
discerner  of  spirits  the  instruction  of  the  prophet :  the  one 
brought  the  precious  metal  from  the  heavenly  treasury,  the 
other  assayed  it,  lest  it  should  have  contracted  any  defile- 
ment or  intermixture  in  the  transmission.  The  apostle  John 
further  giveth,  in  the  same  passage,  as  a  test  of  spirits,  whether 
they  confessed  that  "Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  flesh"  or  not ; 
and  he  repeats  the  same  in  his  second  epistle :  Paul  also,  in 
the  very  chapter  we  are  examining,  gives  us  another  test, 
whether  they  would  say  that  "Jesus  is  the  Lord."  These 
two  doctrines,  of  His  flesh  and  of  His  lordship,  are  the  two 
keys  of  prophecy,  and  the  two  tests  of  Divine  truth,  which  no 
evil  spirit  will  bear.  It  is  very  ominous,  that  these  are  the 
two  very  points  for  which  we  are  now  persecuted  by  many, 
who  deny  Christ  to  have  had  flesh  with  the  law  of  flesh  ;  and 
deny  that  His  lordship  is  of  this  earth — alleging  that,  when 
Satan  shall  have  served  himself  of  it,  it  is  to  be  destroyed. 
I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  these  are  doctrines  of  devils, 
and  that  they  bespeak  a  revival  of  Antichrist  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Church.  This  capacity  of  discerning  the  spirits  which 
speak  in  the  prophets  seems  to  have  been  very  widely,  and 
in  a  degree  universally,  spread  abroad  in  the  Church.  For 
the  same  John,  when  writing  concerning  these  antichrists, 
speaketh  thus  to  the  whole  Church :  "  But  ye  have  an  unction 
from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things.  I  have  not 
written  unto  you  because  ye  know  not  the  truth,  but  because 
ye  know  it,  and  that  no  lie  is  of  the  truth.  These  things  have 
I  written  unto  you  concerning  them  that  seduce  you.  But  the 
anointing  which  ye  have  received  of  him  abideth  in  you,  and 
ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you  :  but  as  the  same  anoint- 
ing teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie,  and 
even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  him,"  (i  John  ii. 
20,  21,  26,  27.)  And  our  Lord,  speaking  upon  the  same  sub- 
ject of  "false  prophets,"  giveth  their  "fruits"  as  a  test  by 
which  all  men  should  be  able  to  prove  them,  (Matt,  vii.)    But 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  487 

while  all  do,  no  doubt,  possess  such  a  measure  of  discernment 
as  to  reject  the  falsehood  and  feed  upon  the  truth,  those  to 
whom  this  gift  was  specially  granted  had  the  higher  faculty 
of  being  able  to  expose  the  sophistry,  and  the  hypocrisy,  and 
subtlety  of  the  devil,  with  which  it  comes  arrayed  :  and  to 
these  persons  the  Church  would  always  be  beholden  in  a  time 
of  trial ;  and,  having  reliance  upon  them,  they  would  minister 
that  caution,  consideration,  and  admonition  against  the  evil, 
which  would  be  efifcctual  to  the  preservation  of  the  Church 
from  heresies  and  offences  which  must  needs  arise.  More- 
over, I  have  little  doubt  that  this  gift  of  detecting  false  spirits 
in  the  speech  of  men  was  also  accompanied  with  the  power 
of  casting  them  out,  in  all  such  cases  as  were  consistent  with 
the  moral  responsibility  of  the  man  possessed.  The  prophet, 
I  believe,  might  be  taken  at  unawares,  and,  himself  deceived, 
become  a  deceiver  of  others :  in  this  case,  being  undeceived 
by  the  faithful  discerner  of  spirits,  he  would  make  entreaty  to 
be  delivered,  and,  having  faith  in  the  presence  and  power  of 
Christ  in  that  man,  he  would  be  delivered  without  further 
delay.  But  in  such  a  case  as  that  referred  to  by  John — of 
which  those  of  Simon  Magus,  and  Hymeneus,  and  Philetus, 
and  Hermogenes  are  examples — where  the  wickedness  of  their 
own  minds,  their  unfaithfulness  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  their 
time-serving,  worldly,  and  ambitious  dispositions  of  mind, 
were  the  occasions  of  their  being  delivered  up  to  such  posses- 
sions, it  is  clear  that,  until  they  repented  and  confessed  their 
sin,  and  sought  the  unity  of  the  Church  again,  they  could 
and  would  receive  no  such  deliverance  from  the  hand  of  the 
Discerner  of  spirits.  This,  surely,  was  a  very  precious  gift  to 
the  Church ;  and  if,  as  all  Scripture  concurreth  to  predict, 
"  the  last  times,"  which  immediately  precede  the  coming  of 
the  Lord,  shall  be  full  of  "  false  Christs  and  false  prophets, 
who  shall  shew  great  signs  and  wonders,  insomuch  that,  if  it 
were  possible,  they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect,"  we  have 
need  to  stir  up  this  gift  which  is  in  the  Church.  When  we 
were  weak  and  sickly,  and  gave  him  little  trouble,  Satan 
suffered  us  to  go  on  declining,  and  took  himself  up  with  other 
matters ;  having  administered  to  us  the  soporific  of  a  lifeless 
system  of  orthodox  terms,  he  went  his  way  about  other  busi- 


488  THE  CHURCH: 

ness :  but,  now  that  the  Church  is  shaking  herself  from  his 
bonds,  and  beginning  to  seek  for  her  long-lost  strength,  and 
is  putting  it  forth  in  word  and  deed,  and  lifting  up  the  banner 
of  truth,  "  Christ  come  in  Flesh  and  to  come  in  Lordship ;" 
behold,  he  will  send  his  Philistines  upon  us — spirits  from  the 
deep ;  and  we  will  need  the  discernment  of  spirits  to  with- 
stand him,  nor  shall  we  be  without  it.  The  Church  is  still 
the  Church  ;  her  life  is  still  in  her,  though  sorely  weakened  ; 
now  she  is  beginning  to  breathe  a  purer  air,  and  her  faculties 
are  returning;  her  weakened  mind  is  beginning  to  understand 
doctrine,  her  miserable  heart  is  beginning  to  conceive  hope, 
and  her  closed  lips  to  be  opened  with  strong  and  fervent  de- 
sires after  her  ancient  strength  and  glory.  Let  her  enemies 
beware ;  let  the  intruders  into  the  fold  make  ready  to  depart ; 
let  those  who  have  lorded  it  over  her  prepare  themselves  for 
a  day  of  recompense,  because  it  is  at  hand,  when  she  shall 
come  forth  "  bright  as  the  sun,  clear  as  the  moon,  and  terrible 
as  an  army  with  banners."  Moreover,  this  discernment  of 
spirits  is  an  excellent  gift  and  kind  ministry  of  Christ  unto 
His  Church,  whereby  she  is  able  to  hold  forth  the  truth  be- 
fore the  world, — that  her  Head  hath  judged  Beelzebub,  the 
prince  of  the  devils ;  hath  judged  the  prince  of  this  world, 
the  spirit  that  now  ruleth  in  the  children  of  disobedience : 
and  not  only  so,  but  that  He  hath  given  to  men  the  dominion 
over  spirits,  who  through  our  wickedness  have  obtained  do- 
minion over  us  :  and  that  His  Church  shall  certainly  trample 
Satan  under  foot,  and  judge  angels,  and  triumph  over  all  the 
powers  of  the  enemy.  But  this  brings  us  upon  the  vein  which 
we  have  already  opened  when  treating  of  the  same  endow- 
ment, as  it  was  laid  out  in  the  promise  of  the  Lord,  whereof 
the  first  particular  is,  "  Ye  shall  cast  out  devils."  Referring 
back  to  what  was  there  said  concerning  the  importance  and 
the  bearing  of  this  sign,  we  now  proceed  to  the  eighth  of 
these  forms  of  the  manifested  Spirit,  which  is  "  divers  kinds 
of  tongues." 

This  also  having  handled  formerly,  in  the  sense  of  a  sign, 
and  shewn  the  thing  which  it  signified,  we  shall  add  here 
what  light  is  afforded  us  as  to  the  manner  of  its  use  and 
occupation.     It  was  first  imparted  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  489 

"when  the  disciples  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them 
utterance,"  (Acts  ii.  6.)  Many,  indeed  almost  all,  have  the 
notion  that  the  apostles  became  all  at  once  learned  in,  and 
masters  of,  foreign  languages,  so  as  to  be  able  to  express  in 
the  various  tongues  of  men  the  knowledge  which  they  pos- 
sessed already.  This  is  altogether  an  erroneous  notion,  as 
will  appear;  and  the  true  one  is  contained  in  the  words  just 
quoted.  They  spoke  according  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  to 
utter,  not  according  to  their  own  previous  knowledge ;  and 
they  spoke  it  in  other  tongues  than  that  which  was  native  to 
them.  It  was  one  acting  of  the  Spirit  to  give  them  the  matter 
and  the  word :  it  came  to  them  clothed  in  word  :  not  in  the 
form  of  idea  first,  to  be  put  by  their  volition  and  skill  of  lan- 
guage into  the  form  of  word ;  but  at  once,  without  their  know- 
ledge of  the  matter  or  of  the  word,  it  came  to  them  ;  the 
Spirit  gave  them  to  utter  what  they  did  utter :  what  it  was, 
they  themselves  might  be  ignorant  of,  or  not,  as  it  happened. 
It  was  one  person's  gift  to  speak  the  language,  it  was  an- 
other's to  interpret  what  was  spoken :  "  To  another,  divers 
kinds  of  tongues ;  to  another,  the  interpretation  of  tongues. 
,  .  .  Do  all  speak  with  tongues  ?  do  all  interpret .-'...  Where- 
fore, let  him  that  speaketh  in  an  unknown  tongue  pray  that 
he  may  interpret.  ...  If  I  pray  in  an  unknown  tongue,  my 
spirit  prayeth,  but  my  understanding  is  unfruitful.  .  .  .  Yet 
in  the  church  I  had  rather  speak  five  words  with  my  under- 
standing, that  by  my  voice  I  might  teach  others  also,  than 
ten  thousand  words  in  an  unknown  tongue."  These  passages, 
extracted  from  the  12th  and  14th  chapters  of  the  First  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians,  shew  that  there  was  no  necessary  con- 
nexion between  speaking  with  a  tongue  and  understanding 
what  was  spoken ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  person  so 
speaking  in  general  understood  not  what  he  said ;  and  if  he 
did,  the  interpretation  was  a  matter  of  as  special  revelation  as 
was  the  utterance  itself;  both  speaker  and  interpreter  being 
alike  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of  any  word  which  had  been 
spoken,  so  as  to  be  able  to  translate  it  into  their  mother 
tongue,  or  to  know  it  grammatically,  or  in  any  way  whatever 
to  make  use  of  it,  until  the  Spirit  moved  again — or,  rather, 


490  THE  CHURCH: 

until  the  person  possessed  of  the  Spirit  in  this  form  put  it 
forth  into  use.  This  idea,  which  is  beyond  a  question  the 
true  one  represented  in  these  two  chapters  of  the  First  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians,  is,  I  think,  implied  in  the  words  quoted 
above  from  the  Acts,  where  the  use  of  the  gift  is  first  de- 
scribed:  "They  spake  with  other  tongues,  just  as  the  Spirit 
gave  to  them  to  emit  the  voice."  The  word  translated  "  ut- 
terance" is  remarkable,  signifying  simply  to  "  emit  a  voice," 
to  "  sound  forth ;"  and  by  the  ancients  was  used  of  prophets, 
whom  they  believed  to  speak  by  another  power  than  their 
own.  It  is  only  three  times  used  in  the  New  Testament : 
once  over  again  in  this  chapter,  (ver.  14,)  "  But  Peter,  standing 
with  the  eleven,  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  uttered,"  or  sounded 
forth,  "to  them;"  and  the  third  time,  (Acts  xxvi.  26,)  when 
Paul,  being  charged  with  being  mad  by  Festus,  probably  from 
the  violence  of  his  voice  or  earnestness  of  his  manner,  replies, 
"  I  am  not  mad,  most  noble  Festus,  but  speak  forth  (give 
forth)  words  of  truth  and  soberness."  It  was  the  Spirit  which 
gave  the  disciples  to  send  forth  those  sounds  in  which  every 
nation  there  assembled  heard  their  native  tongue,  and  in  it 
the  wonderful  works  of  God.  It  was  Christ  using  His  Church 
as  His  organ  for  declaring  to  all  men  in  that  assembly  what 
God  had  done  for  Him,  and  for  them  whose  substitute  He 
was.  And,  no  doubt,  this  is  one  reason  of  the  diversity  of 
tongues  in  the  Church,  because  there  is  a  diversity  of  tongues 
in  the  world  to  which  the  Church  is  called  to  preach  the 
gospel.  But  this  is  only  an  accidental  thing  ;  for  the  whole 
world  was  once  of  one  tongue,  and  might  be  so  again :  still, 
however,  even  in  that  case  the  Spirit  would  in  the  same  way 
bring  the  thought  embodied  in  word,  and  force  it  forth  in 
that  embodied  form.  In  such  a  case,  however,  it  would  be 
prophecy,  as  carrying  its  own  interpretation ;  and  accordingly 
the  apostle  puts  speaking  with  tongues,  when  coupled  with 
interpretation,  upon  the  same  level  with  prophecy  :  "  For 
greater  is  he  that  prophesieth  than  he  that  speaketh  with 
tongues,  except  he  interpret,  that  the  church  may  receive 
edifying."  I  believe  the  words  were  sometimes  brought  to 
the  prophet's  mind,  as  much  as  to  the  mind  of  him  who 
spake  with  tongues ;  and  that  both  did  yield  themselves  in 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  491 

faith  to  the  action  of  the  Spirit,  and  serve  Him  with  their 
tongue.  It  is  also  manifest,  with  respect  to  him  that  spake 
with  tongues,  that,  though  he  understood  not  what  he  said,  it 
was  not  on  that  account  without  edification  to  him :  he  tasted 
the  sweetness  and  had  a  first-fruits  of  the  profitableness  of 
that  truth  which  the  Spirit  was  passing  through  his  tongue  to 
the  understanding  of  another  man.  This  is  very  mysterious, 
but  not  the  less  true  on  that  account.  "  He  that  speaketh  in 
an  unknown  tongue,  speaketh  not  unto  men,  but  unto  God  ; 
for  no  man  understandeth  him,  howbeit  in  the  spirit  he  speak- 
eth mysteries.  But  he  that  prophesieth  speaketh  unto  men 
to  edification,  and  exhortation,  and  comfort.  He  that  speaketh 
in  an  unknown  tongue  edifieth  himself;  but  he  that  prophe- 
sieth edifieth  the  Church,"  (i  Cor.  xiv.  2-4.)  This  edification, 
which  he  derived  from  it  to  himself,  joined  to  the  wonderful- 
ness  of  it,  led  some  who  possessed  it  to  use  it  rashly  and  in- 
discreetly in  the  midst  of  the  Church,  where  it  could  not 
profit ;  and  to  correct  the  selfishness  from  which  this  pro- 
ceeded, and  the  confusion  to  which  it  gave  rise,  the  apostle 
addresseth  himself  with  great  zeal.  It  hath  been  a  subject  of 
great  thought  with  me  to  understand  these  things,  which  are 
the  occasion  of  so  much  scoffing  and  blasphemy  to  many  of 
my  poor  misguided  countrymen ;  and  I  think  God  hath  re- 
warded my  study,  of  which  I  will  now  enumerate  the  results 
under  their  several  heads. 

First,  This  gift  of  tongues  in  the  Church  doth  shew  that 
the  work  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  is  for  all  men,  and  that  He 
wisheth  it  to  be  published  to  all  men  ;  and,  that  His  Church 
may  not  sleep  over  her  vocation,  nor  be  slack  in  the  perform- 
ance of  it,  nor  sink  down  into  local  residences,  good  quarters, 
and  comfortable  settlements,  but  preserve  her  missionary 
spirit,  and  be  a  witness  to  every  generation  of  every  speech 
of  men,  she  is  endowed  with  these  diversities  of  tongues,  and 
goaded  on  to  go  forth  to  the  nations,  to  seek  ears  for  those 
words  which  are  ever  coming  with  such  sweetness  over  her 
heart.  It  is  like  an  ambassador's  commission  ;  it  is  the  Spirit 
saying  to  the  Church,  Send  me  this  man  forth.  Paul  spoke 
more  abundantly  with  tongues  than  they  all  did  (i  Cor. 
xiv.  18,)  and  Paul  was  the  greatest  missionary  of  them  all. 


492  THE  CHURCH: 

And  what  an  assurance  to  a  man's  heart,  and  confirmation  to 
his  faith,  to  have  his  mission  thus  ascertained  to  him,  and 
sealed  by  the  Holy  Ghost !  Methinks  it  would  be  more 
effectual  than  a  salary  of  a  thousand  pounds  by  the  year 
from  the  most  notable  of  our  missionary  societies.  I  feel 
assured  that  these  societies  have  so  shamefully  and  shock- 
ingly come  short  of  the  mark  in  their  faith  and  feeling,  and 
performance  also,  that,  if  the  world  is  to  receive  warning  be- 
fore the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord,  it  must  be  by  the 
Church  seeking  again  for  this  long-lost  endowment ;  seeking 
for  her  trumpet  with  its  many  notes,  through  which  to  speak 
to  the  nations. 

Secondly,  This  gift  of  tongues  doth  put  beyond  all  doubt 
the  unity  of  Christ  and  His  members,  inasmuch  as  it  shews 
Him  in  His  people  doing  whatever  their  own  soul  within 
them  can  do.  Speech  is  the  means  by  which  an  embodied 
spirit  doth  manifest  its  existence ;  distinguishing  man,  a  living 
soul,  from  every  other  living  thing  upon  the  earth.  Speech 
is  the  manifestation  of  reason  ;  and  by  our  capacity  of  utter- 
ing, and  understanding  the  words  uttered,  is  proved  the  com- 
monness, the  oneness  of  that  reason,  in  which  many  persons 
have  their  being.  Now  when  Christ  doth  occupy  the  place 
of  my  reasonable  spirit,  and  with  my  tongue  doth  express 
whatever  I  am  capable  of  expressing,  He  is  proved  to  be  in 
me  as  truly  as  I  am  in  myself  If  my  body  is  known  to  be 
the  habitation  of  my  soul  by  its  obeying  all  the  desires  of  the 
soul,  and  expressing  them  in  form  of  word ;  then,  by  the 
same  method  of  conviction  is  Christ  proved  to  be  in  me, 
when  He  doth  through  the  organs  of  my  body  express  His 
own  mind  to  those  whom  I  can  by  no  means  reach  by  any 
expression  of  my  own.  This  same  truth  of  an  indwelling 
Christ  is  proved  by  any  other  of  the  gifts  to  the  experience 
of  him  who  hath  them ;  but  by  the  gift  of  tongues  it  is  proved 
to  others  besides  ourselves,  even  to  all  who  hear  in  their  own 
language  the  testimony  of  God  and  of  Christ.  It  is  seen 
that  God  is  in  me  of  a  truth,  when  that  power  within  me  doth 
testify  to  no  other  person  but  to  Christ,  in  His  work  of  humi- 
liation and  exaltation,  in  His  flesh  and  in  His  lordship. 
Now,  if  it  be  considered  what  a  point  of  doctrine  the  union 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  493 

of  Christ  with  believers  is,  the  importance  of  the  gift  of 
tongues  will  the  more  appear.  By  the  truth,  that  the  spirit 
of  a  man  out  of  the  world  dwells  in  many  men  in  the  world 
at  one  and  the  same  time,  and  continues  this  inhabitation 
from  age  to  age,  what  less  is  proved  but  that  this  person  is 
also  God  ?  For  who  but  God  can  thus  connect  that  which 
is  not  in  the  world  with  that  which  is  in  the  world ;  who  but 
God  can  keep  up  the  communication  and  the  intercourse  be- 
tween the  Father's  throne  and  the  world  ?  But,  then,  Christ's 
soul  being  a  limited  substance,  with  which  the  Godhead  con- 
tinually acts,  another  question  ariseth,  How  can  this  limited 
substance,  which  is  now  out  of  the  world,  be  yet  in  the  world, 
in  the  souls  of  many  men,  in  all  ages  of  the  world  ?  This 
can  only  be  by  means  of  another  Being,  proceeding  from 
Christ  to  the  bounds  of  all  space  and  time,  and  able  to  unite 
them  into  oneness  with  Him.  But  in  order  that  this  may  be, 
he  must  be  of  one  substance  with  Christ ;  and  also  he  must 
be  a  person,  in  order  to  comprehend  a  person,  and  inform 
many  persons  with  the  same  spirit.  And  thus  is  the  Divi- 
nity and  the  Personality  of  the  Comforter  made  to  appear 
through  this  great  truth  of  Christ  the  inhabiterof  His  people; 
which,  again,  is  proved  by  His  using  their  organs  in  a  way 
in  which  they  themselves  are  not  able  to  do.  Moreover,  this 
power  of  Christ  in  the  Spirit  to  speak  all  the  diversities  of 
speech,  shews  Him  to  be  the  fountain-head  of  speech,  the 
Word,  by  whose  endowment  man  is  a  word-speaking  crea- 
ture :  while  by  his  power  to  enter  into  all  the  forms  of  reason, 
and  deliver  God  in  such  a  way  as  all  diversities  of  reason 
shall  apprehend,  He  is  proved  to  be  the  one  Reason,  of  whose 
fulness  we  have  all  received,  who  lighteth  every  man  that 
cometh  into  the  world.  What  doth  this  inhabitation  of  my 
reason  by  another  than  myself,  at  His  will,  and  using  it  in  a 
way  which  unequivocally  proves  that  He  is  another  than  my- 
self; what  doth  this  prove  less  than  that  I  am  but  the  tenant 
of  that  other's  domain,  who  thus  masterfully  can  occupy  His 
own,  and  for  the  while  suspend  my  vicegerency .'' 

Thirdly,  But  there  is  something  deeper  still  than  this  one- 
ness of  reason  and  lordship  of  reason  resident  in  Christ, 
proved  by  these  gifts  of  tongues — namely,  That  a  person  is 


494  'I' HE  CHURCH : 

something  more  than  that  community  of  reason  which  he 
doth  occupy  as  the  tenant  of  Him  whose  name  is  The  Logos, 
or  The  Reason.  For  it  clearly  appeareth,  from  the  14th 
chapter  of  the  First  of  Corinthians,  that  when  the  man's  rea- 
son is  wholly  without  fruit,  when  he  understandeth  nothing 
that  is  spoken,  he  doth  yet  receive  great  edification  in  his 
own  spirit — "  he  edifieth  himself  "  (ver.  4) — and  holdeth,  inde- 
pendent of  reason,  a  communication  with  God — "  he  speak- 
eth  unto  God,"  (ver.  2.)  Doth  not  this  prove  that  all  forms 
of  the  reason  within,  which  speech  expresseth  outwardly, 
may  be  inactive — as  if  it  were  dead,  "  fruitless  "  and  barren — 
and  yet  the  spirit  itself  be  receiving  great  edification  from 
God,  through  means  which  are  wholly  independent  of  in- 
telligence .■*  Indeed,  to  deny  this,  is  to  deny  the  possi- 
bility of  direct  communication  between  God  and  the  soul 
otherwise  than  by  speech  or  books  which  address  us  through 
the  reason ;  it  is  to  set  aside  the  subject  of  spiritual  gifts 
altogether:  and  methinks  it  takes  away  that  personality 
from  a  man,  by  means  of  which  it  is  that  he  informs, 
awakens,  and  occupies  the  gift  of  reason.  The  gift  of 
tongues  brings  all  speculation  upon  this  subject  to  an  end, 
and  presents  us  with  the  fact,  the  experiment  which  decides 
the  matter,  by  shewing  us  the  reason  void,  and  the  spirit  yet 
filled  with  edification.  Nay,  so  clearly  were  the  apostle,  and 
those  to  whom  he  wrote,  conscious  to  this  thing,  that  he  takes 
a  distinction  between  praying  in  the  spirit  and  praying  in  the 
understanding,  praising  in  the  spirit  and  praising  in  the  un- 
derstanding ;  holding  man  to  be  capable  of  worshipping  and 
serving  God  when  his  understanding  is  wholly  without  acti- 
vity. (See  I  Cor.  xiv.  14-17.)  Nor  could  there  be  any  mys- 
ticism or  self-deception  in  this  ;  for  while  my  spirit  was 
emptying  itself  of  all  its  prayer  and  praise  to  God,  my  under- 
standing not  comprehending  a  word,  if  any  should  think  it 
were  but  a  farce  and  profanation,  another  person,  understand- 
ing the  language,  will  contradict  him,  and  let  him  know  that 
it  is  sound  sense  and  pure  rdigion  which  I  am  expressing. 
And  yet  the  words  are  not  necessary  for  God's  ear ;  and 
the  apostle  recommends,  yea,  and  strongly  urges  it,  that, 
when  no  man  able  to  understand  the  language  was  present, 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  495 

or  no  one  who  had  the  gift  of  interpretation,  it  were  better  to 
keep  silence,  and  enjoy  the  communion  with  God  through 
the  Spirit  only  :  "  But  if  there  be  no  interpreter,  let  him  keep 
silence  in  the  church  ;  and  let  him  speak  to  himself  and  to 
God,"  (ver.  28.)  What  a  deep  subject  of  meditation  were  a 
man  thus  employed  in  secret  converse  with  and  enjoyment 
of  God,  although  his  reason  be  utterly  dead  !  He  is  not  able 
to  communicate  thereof  to  another  person  :  for  the  world  he 
is  as  one  dead  :  for  all  that  he  holds  in  common  with  men  he 
is  as  one  dead  :  he  is  in  the  state  of  a  separate  spirit,  and  he 
is  enjoying  the  same  inward  delight  with  God  which  I  sup- 
pose the  separate  spirits  to  enjoy.  And  I  might  ask,  is  not 
this  the  essence  of  all  spiritual  religion, — the  enjoyment  and 
communion  of  the  spirit  with  God  in  that  capacity  which  death 
nowise  affecteth  ?  And  is  not  the  use  of  reason  altogether 
for  the  impartation  of  this  to  others,  for  the  edification  of  the 
Church?  But  conclusion  rises  upon  conclusion.  It  is  a  great 
subject  this  of  the  gift  of  tongues.  I  wish  some  one  would  re- 
trieve it  from  the  ignorance  and  folly  and  mockery  of  those 
revilers  who  have  lately  so  insulted  this  mystery  of  our  faith, 
and  laughed  to  scorn  this  endowment  of  the  Church,  under- 
standing no  more  by  it  than  a  short-hand  way  of  acquiring 
languages. 

Upon  the  ninth  and  last  of  these  gifts,  "  the  interpretation 
of  tongues,"  little  need  be  added,  as  it  is  so  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  former.  It  did  not  consist  in  their  know- 
ledge of  the  strange  words,  or  the  structure  of  the  foreign 
languages.  It  was  nothing  akin  to  translation ;  the  Spirit 
did  not  become  a  schoolmaster  at  all ;  but  brought  to  the 
man's  soul  with  the  certainty  of  truth,  that  this  which  He 
was  giving  him  to  utter  was  the  interpretation  of  the  thing 
which  the  other  had  just  spoken.  This  conviction  might  be 
brought  to  the  spirit  of  the  speaker  himself,  and  then  he  was 
his  own  interpreter  ;  but  it  was  more  frequent  to  bestow  that 
gift  upon  another.  This  provision  of  an  order  who  should 
interpret,  as  well  as  an  order  who  should  speak  with  tongues, 
shews  that  the  gift  of  tongues  had  a  higher  origin  than  from 
the  variety  of  languages  amongst  men.  If  it  had  been  merely 
for  preaching  the  truth  to  people  of  other  languages,  an  order 


496  THE  CHURCH: 

of  interpreters  would  never  have  been  required  at  all.  If  it 
had  only  been  given  for  conveying  the  truth  to  foreign  nations, 
then  why  have  so  many  in  each  church,  like  the  church  of 
Corinth  ?  If  it  be  said,  this  was  to  stir  them  to  go  forth  to 
those  whose  tongues  they  had  received  ;  while  I  allow  that 
this  is  so  far  forth  good  and  true,  it  is  by  no  means  the  whole 
truth  ;  for  why,  then,  have  an  order  of  interpreters  there  also  ? 
This  shews  that  the  gift  was  good  for  that  Church  in  itself; 
that  it  was  resident  in  the  churches  for  home  use,  as  well  as 
for  service  abroad ;  and  that  God  saw  such  use  in  it,  as  to 
provide  another  ministry  for  the  purpose  of  making  it  avail- 
able to  the  uses  for  which  it  was  given.  If  the  circumstance 
of  the  language  being  foreign  would  have  prompted  them  to 
go  forth  to  the  heathen,  the  interpretation  being  at  hand 
would  prompt  them  to  remain  with  the  Church ;  and  both 
being  standing  orders  in  the  Church,  we  conclude  that  this  gift 
of  speaking  with  another  tongue,  and  the  other  gift  of  inter- 
preting what  was  spoken,  are,  being  taken  together,  a  constant 
accomplishment  of  the  Church,  necessary  to  her  completeness 
wherever  she  is,  and  to  be  continued  with  her  even  though 
the  whole  world  had  been  converted  to  the  faith  and  the  office 
of  the  missionary  were  done  away  with  for  ever.  Let  us  con- 
sider this  twofold  ordinance  as  one,  and  see  what  it  yieldeth. 
If  there  should  be  in  our  church  an  order  of  men,  of  whom  the 
Spirit  so  manifestly  took  possession  as  to  make  them  utter 
the  mysteries  of  godliness  in  an  unknown  tongue,  and  another 
order  of  men  to  whom  the  Spirit  divided  the  power  of  inter- 
preting the  same,  the  first  impression  that  would  be  made  by 
it  is,  that  verily  God  was  in  us  of  a  truth,  as  truly  as  He  was 
in  the  Shechinah  of  the  holy  place ;  and  the  next,  that  He 
was  speaking  forth  oracles  for  our  obedience.  The  unknown 
tongue,  as  it  began  its  strange  sounds,  would  be  equal  to  a 
voice  from  the  glory,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  or 
"  This  is  my  Son,  hear  ye  him ;"  and  every  ear  would  say, 
"  Oh  that  I  knew  the  voice  ;"  and  when  the  man  with  the  gift 
of  interpretation  gave  it  out  in  the  vernacular  tongue,  we  would 
be  filled  with  an  awe,  that  it  was  no  other  than  God  who  had 
spoken  it.  Methinks  it  is  altogether  equal  to  the  speaking 
with  th'e  trumpet  from  the  thick  darkness  of  the  Mount,  or 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  497 

with  a  voice  as  thunder  from  the  open  vault  of  heaven.     The 
using  of  man's  organs  is,  indeed,  a  mark  of  a  new  dispensation, 
foretold  as  to  come  to  pass  after  Christ  ascended  up  on  high, 
when  He  would  receive  gifts  and  bestow  them  upon  men,  that 
the  Lord  God  might  dwell,  might  have  an  habitation,  in  them. 
Formerly  the  sounds  were  syllabled  we  know  not  how,  because 
God  had  not  yet  prepared  for  Himself  a  tent  of  flesh  ;  which 
He  accomplished  to  do  first  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  is  now 
perfecting  in  His  Church,  who  are  His  temple,  in  whom  He 
abideth  as  in  the  holy  place,  and  from  whom   He  speaketh 
forth  His  oracles   in  strange  tongues.     The  strange  tongue 
takes  away  all  source  of  ambiguity,  proving  that  the  man 
himself  hath   nothing  to  do  with  it,   and  leaves    the  work 
and  the  authority  of  the  word  wholly  in  the  hand  of  God. 
And  therefore  tongues  are  called  a  sign  to  the   unbeliever, 
I  Cor.  xiv.  22  :  "  Wherefore  tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to 
them  that  believe,  but  to  them  that  believe  not."    Just  as  the 
voice  given  at  Bethabara  over  the  baptized  Christ  was  spoken 
as  a  ground  of  faith  to  the  unbelieving  Jew,  and  the  voice 
given  before  His   passion  was  a  confirmation  to  the  faith 
of  the  inquiring  Greek,  and  of  all  who  heard  it :  so  these 
voices,  spoken  forth  from  the  breasts  of  men,  by  a  power  not 
human,  but  divine,  are  intended  to  convince  the  unbelievers 
that  God  really  dwelleth  in  the   Church  ;  hath  chosen  the 
Church  for  His  habitation  ;  and  that,  if  they  would  find  Him, 
they  must  seek  Him  there,   for  nowhere  else  is  He  to  be 
found.     The  prophet  Isaiah,  to  whom  it  was  given  to  fore- 
w^arn  men  of  this  particular  gift  of  tongues,  doth  so  speak  of 
it  as  a  fresh  evidence  which  God  would  give  to  men  for  a 
ground  of  believing,  and  which,  alas  !  they  would  also  reject. 
I  take  the  quotation  as  the  apostle  hath  sanctioned  it,  the 
Holy  Spirit's  version  of  His  own  words  :  "  With  men  of  other 
tongues,  and  other  lips,  will  I  speak  unto  this  people  :  and 
yet  for  all  that  will  they  not  hear  me,  saith  the  Lord,"  (i  Cor. 
xiv.  21.)     I  cannot  but  look  upon  this  gift  of  tongues  as  seal- 
ing up  the  sum  of  God's  dealings  with  men  for  their  obedience 
of  faith.     It  is  the  very  power  of  God,  which  to  blaspheme  is 
to  blaspheme  the  Holy  Ghost.     And  witness  what  power  it 
had  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  three  thousand  were  added 
VOL.  V.  21 


498  TH.E  CHURCH: 

to  the  Church.  This  is  the  "  greater  thing  "  which  was  to  be 
done  by  him  that  believeth.  No  one  could  say  that  Jesus  was 
the  Christ,  that  God  was  in  Him,  but  by  the -Spirit  leading 
him  into  the  truth  of  what  He  spoke,  or  convincing  him  of 
the  Divine  nature  of  the  works  which  He  did.  God  did  not 
manifest  Himself  in  Christ  in  this  unequivocal  way;  for  Christ's 
life  was  not  a  witness  to  Himself,  but  to  the  Father.  Christ 
came  to  do  the  Father's  will  in  our  condition,  that  we  in  the 
like  case  might  be  assured  of  power  and  ability  through  Him 
to  do  the  same.  He  was  the  prototype  of  a  perfect  and  holy 
man  under  the  conditions  of  the  Fall,  that  we,  under  those 
conditions,  might  know  there  was  power  and  will  in  God  that 
we  should  all  be  perfect  and  holy.  This  being  accomplished, 
and  Christ  ascended  up  on  high,  God  sets  on  foot  another 
work,  which  is  to  testify  that  honour  to  which  man  had  be- 
come advanced  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  in  all 
other  persons  who  by  faith  should  be  united  to  Him,  As  God 
had  shewn  how  far  man  had  fallen  in  Adam,  by  the  state  of 
the  world  under  sin  and  suffering  and  death ;  so,  by  the 
Church  would  He  shew  how  far  man  had  risen  in  Christ, 
that  all  men  believing  in  Him  might  be  brought  to  that  ex- 
ceeding exaltation.  Therefore  in  the  Church  He  shews  not 
man's  identity  with  the  fallen  Adam,  but  man's  identity  with 
the  risen  Adam.  In  the  incarnation,  Christ's  identity  with 
the  fallen  man  was  shewn,  yet  without  sin  :  in  the  Church, 
Christ's  identity  with  God  is  shewn,  the  power  and  glory  of 
God  in  Him  are  exhibited,  that  all  men  might  believe  in  His 
name.  This  gift  of  tongues  is  the  crowning  act  of  all.  None 
of  the  old  prophets  had  it ;  Christ  had  it  not ;  it  belongs  to  the 
dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeding  from  the  risen 
Christ :  it  is  the  proclamation  that  man  is  enthroned  in  heaven, 
that  man  is  the  dwelling-place  of  God,  that  all  creation,  if  they 
would  know  God,  must  give  ear  to  man's  tongue,  and  know  the 
compass  of  reason.  It  is  not  we  that  speak,  but  Christ  that 
speaketh.  It  is  not  in  us  as  men  that  God  speaks  ;  but  in  us 
as  members  of  Christ,  as  the  Church  and  body  of  Christ,  that 
God  speaks.  The  honour  is  not  to  us,  but  to  Christ ;  not  to 
the  Godhead  of  Christ,  which  is  ever  the  same,  but  to  the 
manhood  of  Christ,  which  hath  been  raised  from  the  state  of 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  499 

death  to  the  state  of  beingr  God's  temple,  God's  most  holy 
place,  God's  shechinah,  God's  oracle,  for  ever  and  ever. 
"And  yet  for  all  that  will  they  not  hear  me,  saith  the  Lord." 
It  is  most  true,  O  God  :  they  will  not  hear  even  this,  because 
total  ignorance  has  benighted  them  :  nor  are  they  capable  of 
apprehending  truth  ;  the  vanity  of  their  minds  hath  carried 
them  away :  "  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with  wine  ;  they 
stagger,  but  not  with  strong  drink  ;  for  thou  hast  poured  out 
upon  them  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep,  and  hast  closed  their 
ejes ;  their  prophets  and  the  rulers  the  seers  hath  he  covered." 
Tien,  O  Lord,  if  Thou  hast  given  them  up,  and  they  may  not 
bf  convinced,  let  this  strengthen  Thy  children,  and  against  the 
re.^t  let  it  turn  for  a  testimony — a  testimony  to  Thy  truth,  a 
testimony  to  their  falsehood  and  hypocrisy.  "  O  that  my 
headwere  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I 
mightweep  day  and  night  for  the  children  of  the  daughter  of 
my  p&ple !  " 

HavuT  thus  opened  at  large  the  endowment  of  the  Church, 
the  bod>of  Christ,  and  shewn  of  what  it  is  the  first  fruits  and 
the  earnet,  it  may  be  expected  that  I  should  enter  into  con- 
troversy Vth  those  who  say  they  have  been  withdrawn,  and 
are  not  to  »e  restored  again  ;  that  they  were  only  intended  to 
abide  for  aeason,  until  the  evidence  of  the  Christian  religion 
should  havC^een  securely  established,  and  the  canon  of  Scrip- 
ture comple^d.  But,  before  I  can  think  this  worth  the  while, 
I  must  first  s-  where  they  get  the  grounds  of  their  hypothesis, 
that  they  we.  intended  only  to  continue  for  that  brief  sea- 
son ;  in  the  eantime  I  pronounce  it  to  be  of  their  own 
invention,  andiot  at  all  of  the  Word  of  God.  I  have  shewn 
the  great  pur^se  and  end  of  this  endowment  of  spiritual 
gifts ;  that  pur^se  and  end  is  not  temporary,  but  perpetual, 
till  Christ's  coing  again;  when  that  which  is  perfect  shall 
come,  and  that  \ich  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away.  If  they  ' 
ask  for  an  expiation  of  the  fact  that  these  powers  have 
ceased  in  the  Chch,  I  answer,  that  they  have  decayed  just 
as  faith  and  holins  have  decayed  ;  but  that  they  have  ceased 
is  not  a  matter  scdear.  Till  the  time  of  the  Reformation, 
this  opinion  was  ^ver  mooted  in  the  Church ;  and  to  this 


500  THE  CHURCH : 

day  the  Roman   Catholics,  and  every  other  portion  of  the 
Church  but  ourselves,  maintain  the  very  contrary.      More- 
over, it  is  only  of  later  days  that  any  one  hath  dared  to  assert 
that  the  gifts  of  prophecy  and  healing  are  no  longer  to  be 
looked  for.     Read  the  lives  of  the  Reformers,  of  the  Purita/is, 
of  the  Covenanters,  written  by  sound  and  zealous  Protestants; 
read  the  histories  of  the  Church  written  more  than  fifty  y^ars 
ago — our  Petrie,  for  example — and  shew  me  whether  tljese 
writers  hold  it  blasphemy  to  say  that  a  man  may  be,  and  hath 
been,  gifted  with  both  these  gifts,  especially  that  of  prophecf  .'* 
Who  has  not  heard  of  the  prophecies  of  Huss,  and  of  Wisha/t.^ 
Amongst   the   Protestants   of  the  elder  day,  who    had  in 
them  a  good  measure  of  faith,  even  beyond  what  their  cred 
expressed,  I  find  no  such  hard  scepticism  and'mocking  s<orn 
as  hath  been  sounded  abroad  within  these  months  past,  P  the 
shame  of  those  who  have  uttered  it,  if  they  be  capable/)f  the 
sense  of  shame.     But  if  I  am  called  upon  to  declare  w^  Pro- 
testants have  not  enjoyed  the  manifestation  of  thesygifts,  I 
not  only  refer  to  the  general  tenor  of  their  creed  i/)on  the 
subject,  which  hath  leant  to  the  side  of  their  bein^ ceased; 
but,  which  is  of  much  more  importance  than  a  writ^n  creed, 
I  refer  to  the  spirit  of  their  doctrine,  and  their  prea/^ing,  and 
their  practice.     And  I  would  say,  that  this  gift  l^th  ceased 
to  be  visible  in  the  Church,  because  of  her  grea/ ignorance 
concerning  that  work  of  Christ  at  His  secondcoming,  of 
which  it  is  the  continual  sign  ;  because  of  her  rnst  culpable 
ignorance  of  Christ's  crowned  glory,  of  which  /is  the  con- 
tinual demonstration  ;    because   of  her   indiff^nce   to   the 
world  without,  for  preaching  to  which  the  giyof  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  continual  furnishing  and  outfit  /  the  Church. 
Since  the  Reformation  little  else  has  been  p/ached  besides 
the  baptismal  and   eucharistical  gift,   the  \v/k    of  Christ's 
death  unto  the  justification  and  sanctificatioiif"  the  believer. 
The  dignity  and  office  of  the  Church,  as  t|  fulness  of  the 
Lord  of  all,  hath  not  been  fully  preached,  of  mily  held,  and 
is  now  almost  altogether  lost  sight  of.     Ch/ch  government, 
bickerings  about  the  proper  form  of  polityJnd  the  standing 
of  the  civil  magistrate  to  the  Church  and  iifl"'e  Church,  have 
been  almost  the  only  things  concerning  /e  Church  which 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  501 

have  come  into  question  among  Protestants ;  and  there  hath 
been  no  holding  of  her  up  to  the  heathen  as  the  holy  place  of 
God,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  presentation  of  a  Book  in  the 
stead  thereof.  Not  but  the  Reformation  was  the  beginning 
of  a  great  and  a  good  work ;  but  that,  so  far  from  having 
made  progress  towards  completion,  it  has  gone  a  great  way 
backward,  and  in  our  hands  is  a  poor  shred  of  what  it  was 
in  the  hands  of  Luther,  and  Hooker,  and  the  like.  But 
things  are  taking  a  turn.  Let  the  Church  know  that  things 
are  taking  a  mighty  turn.  There  is  a  shining  forth  of  truth 
in  these  subjects  beyond,  former  days.  The  power  and  glory 
of  a  risen  Lord,  as  well  as  the  holiness  of  a  Lord  in  flesh,  is 
beginning  to  be  understood  and  discoursed  of;  and  the 
enemy  would  spread  a  curtain  of  thin  sophistry  between  the 
Church  and  the  bright  dawn  :  he  might  as  well  hide  the 
morning  by  drawing  before  our  eyes  the  spider's  cobweb,  or 
the  frost-work  of  the  night,  which  the  rising  sun  quickly  dissi- 
pates— and  so,  I  trust,  may  these  poor  men,  who  write  their 
unsober  and  uncharitable  revilings  in  their  several  parcels  of 
periodical  abuse,  be  themselves,  like  the  frost-work  of  the 
morning,  absorbed  into  the  glorious  light  which  the  rising 
morn  is  shedding  around  them.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  now 
that  the  inward  work  of  apprehending  the  glory  of  Christ  is 
begun,  and  proceeding  apace,  we  may  surely  expect  that  the 
outward  means  of  convincing  the  world  that  it  is  no  cunningly 
contrived  fable,  will  be  afforded  to  the  Church  ;  and  that  she 
will  have  her  full  dignity  restored  to  her  of  testif}'ing  not 
only  to  a  holy  Lord  in  flesh  crucified  for  all  men,  but  of  a 
risen  Lord  in  power  and  glory,  crowned  for  His  Church,  and 
in  His  Church  putting  forth  unto  the  world  a  first-fruits  of 
that  power  and  government  over  all  creation  which  in  her  He 
shall  ever  exercise  over  all  creation.  These  gifts  have  ceased^ 
I  would  say,  just  as  the  verdure  and  leaves  and  flowers  and 
fruits  of  the  spring  and  summer  and  autumn  cease  in  winter, 
because,  by  the  chill  and  wintry  blasts  which  have  blown 
over  the  Church,  her  power  to  put  forth  her  glorious  beauty 
hath  been  prevented.  But  because  the  winter  is  without  a 
green  leaf  or  beautiful  flower,  do  men  thereof  argue  that 
there  shall  be  flowers  and  fruits  no  more .-'     Trusting  to  the 


502  THE  CHURCH: 

Word  of  God,  who  hath  created  everything  to  produce  and 
bring  forth  its  kind,  man  puts  out  his  hand  in  winter,  and 
makes  preparations  for  the  coming  year :  so,  if  the  Church 
be  still  in  existence,  and  that  no  one  denies;  and  if  it  be  the 
law  and  end  of  her  being  to  embody  a  first-fruits  and  earnest 
of  the  power  which  Christ  is  to  put  forth  in  the  redemption 
of  all  nature ;  then,  what  though  she  hath  been  brought  so 
low,  her  life  is  still  in  her,  and  that  life  will,  under  a  more 
genial  day,  put  forth  its  native  powers.  Will  God  be  baffled 
in  His  own  most  perfect  work,  in  that  work  which  He  hath 
wrought  for  the  honour  of  His  Son  ?  I  trow  not.  The 
Church  is  in  the  condition  of  a  man  faint,  and  sick,  and  appa- 
rently dead,  who  putteth  forth  neither  manly  voice  nor  vigor- 
ous action,  and  is  even  incapable  of  thought,  and  almost  be- 
yond feeling ;  but  let  that  man  revive  again,  (and  we  know 
the  Church  never  dies,)  and  he  will  both  hear  and  see  and 
feel  and  act  the  man.  So,  if  the  Church  reviveth,  she  must 
act  as  the  Church;  which  is  not  in  the  way  of  holiness 
merely,  but  in  the  way  of  power,  for  the  manifestation  of  the 
completeness  of  Christ's  work  in  flesh,  and  the  first-fruits  of 
the  same  work  in  glory.  The  Church  is  like  a  man  who  has 
been  fed  upon  sloes,  without  fruits  and  husks,  without  ker- 
nels, refuse  which  the  swine  should  eat ;  and  she  is  grown 
lean  and  weak  and  helpless ;  and,  moreover,  she  has  grown 
degraded  in  her  ideas — she'  has  forgotten  the  nobility  of  her 
birth,  and  the  grandeur  of  her  destination;  but  what  then.-' 
give  her  proper  meat,  give  her  nourishing  drink,  feed  her 
with  marrow  and  with  fatness,  and  she  will  put  forth  her 
might  again,  and  rejoice  in  her  high  places.  The  question  is, 
whether  that  be  the  endowment  of  the  Church  which  we 
have  laid  down  above  t  If  so,  then  rest  assured  that  when 
she  revives  again  she  will  embody  the  law  according  to 
which  she  was  made,  and  shew  forth  the  beauty  and  put  forth 
the  power  with  which  she  was  endowed  in  the  day  of  her 
birth.  If  there  be  a  revival,  she  will  put  forth  consentaneously 
and  altogether  more  knowledge,  more  love,  more  power,  more 
holiness,  more  complete  testimony  to  the  power  of  Him 
whose  members  she  is,  of  that  Spirit  which  abideth  in  her,  of 
tb  it  God  which  worketh  all  tlie  gifts  in  all  the  members. 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  503 

They  called  Methodism  and  Evangelicalism  a  revival :  I 
always  have  maintained  that,  though  better  than  downright 
Pelagianism,  they  were  far  behind  the  Reformation ;  which 
itself  was  only  the  beginning  of  a  glorious  work,  strangled  in 
its  cradle.  But  now  I  see  a  revival  worthy  of  the  name — a 
revival  of  doctrine,  of  discipline,  of  holiness.  Christians  are 
beginning  to  speak  their  native  language  of  faith  and  truth, 
and  to  endure  their  prerogative  of  being  partakers  of  the 
Lord's  sufferings.  And  if  this  revival  proceed,  it  cannot  but 
shew  itself  in  all  those  essential  functions  for  which  the 
Church  was  constituted;  of  which  one  is,  to  enjoy  and  hold 
forth  a  first-fruits  of  that  power  which  Christ  is  to  act  out  in 
the  day  of  His  appearing.  I  feel  it  of  the  greatest  import- 
ance that  those  who  are  seeking  to  deter  men  from  these 
great  truths  should  be  resisted,  and  that  their  mouths  should 
be  stopped  :  I  feel  it  of  still  more  importance  that  those  who 
are  inquiring  and  searching  into  these  things  should  proceed 
wath  faith  and  prayer,  under  the  guidance  of  God's  Holy 
Word. 

And,  therefore,  with  all  patience,  as  one  who  is  working  for 
a  master  the  work  that  his  master  hath  set  him  to  do,  have  I 
endeavoured  to  exhibit  at  large  the  Church's  endowment  of 
her  Great  Head,  consisting  of  two  parts  :  the  first,  the  inherit- 
ance of  His  complete  work  wrought  in  the  flesh ;  the  second,  the 
first-fruits  of  the  work  which  He  is  to  work  when  He  comes 
again.  The  former  consisteth  in  perfect  holiness,  through  the 
renewal  of  the  soul ;  which  is  strengthened  to  subdue  the  in- 
nate propensities  of  the  flesh  to  evil,  to  crucify  the  world,  and 
to  overcome  the  evil  one.  This  we  have  served  out  to  us  in 
the  two  sacraments  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  in  the 
one  of  which  we  receive  cleanness  of  conscience,  and  in  the 
other  participation  of  Christ's  sanctified  flesh  and  purchased 
inheritance.  But  none  of  these  go  further  than  to  possess  us 
of  what  He  purchased  in  the  flesh  :  "This  is  my  body,  given 
for  you  ;  this  is  my  blood,  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins:" 
His  body,  given  for  the  life  of  the  world  ;  His  blood,  shed  for 
the  putting  away  of  all  sin.  The  Church  hath  perfect  holiness 
ministered  to  her  in  these  two  ordinances  :  Christ  doth  thereby 
dispense  that  gift  of  the  Spirit  which  was  dispensed  to  Him  by 


504  THE  CHURCH: 

the  Father  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  and  by  the  faithful  use  of 
which  He  "  sanctified  Himself."  And  we,  having  in  these 
most  comfortable  ordinances  that  blessed  fellowship  of  holi- 
ness, should  sanctify  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  holy  as  He  is 
holy.  This  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  uniting  us  unto  Christ  ; 
taking  out  of  us  our  unholiness  and  grafting  us  into  Christ. 
There  is  a  power  in  the  Spirit  to  wash  the  Ethiopian  white. 
It  is  not  in  man,  but  it  is  in  God,  to  do  so  ;  and  the  element 
with  which  to  do  it  He  hath  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  which 
cleanseth  away  all  sins.  Every  man  baptized  into  the  Church 
is  answerable  for  a  life  of  spotless,  stainless  holiness.  What 
though  no  man  hath  yielded  it  t  So  much  the  more  is  the 
sinfulness  of  our  nature  proved,  and  the  divinity  of  Christ 
shewn,  who  did  present  mortal  flesh  sinless  :  and  let  Him  be 
glorified,  and  every  man  be  a  liar.  But  the  truth  of  God 
standeth  not  the  less  sure.  "  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man 
a  liar."  Out  of  this  claim  which  God  hath,  and  this  power 
Avhich  we  receive  after  baptism,  for  a  perfect  holiness,  come 
our  confessions  in  the  Church,  which  are  confessions  not  only 
of  the  natural  guilt  and  strength  of  sin,  but  of  the  deeper  and 
deeper  guilt  which  it  hath  contracted  in  our  eyes'  by  warring 
against  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  striking  at  the  life  of  Christ  in 
the  soul  of  the  believer.  Not  only  a  creation-defiling,  but  a 
Redeemer-slaying  thing  is  sin  ;  not  only  aiming  at  the  work 
of  God,  but  at  the  person  of  God  manifest  in  flesh.  This 
standard  of  perfection  is  what  we  measure  ourselves  by,  and 
not  each  man's  notion  of  what  he  can  attain  to.  Man,  though 
fallen  into  a  state  of  weakness,  is  still  kept  responsible  for  the 
law  of  perfect  holiness,  as  at  the  beginning  :  and  he  is  brought 
to  depend  upon  God  the  Redeemer,  the  incarnate  God,  the 
God  proceeding  forth  into  flesh  to  uphold  it ;  and  so  believing 
in  a  God  creating,  a  God  incarnate,  and  a  God  proceeding 
forth  upon  flesh,  in  order  to  attain  unto  holiness,  we  attain 
thereunto,  and  are  stable  therein  ;  and  so  are  brought  into  the 
great  truth  of  God,  that  no  holiness  can  be  otherwise  effected 
save  by  the  faith  of  God  in  Trinity  acting  according  to  their 
offices.  The  sin  which  occurreth  in  the  Church  is  through 
want  of  faith  in  the  Godhead  thus  manifested ;  and  that  sin 
continually  occurring,  through  the  defect  of  our  faith,  is  the 


HER  ENDOWMENT.  505 

occasion  for  a  continual  High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God, 
whose  work  of  intercession  may  continually  go  on.  Of  this 
there  is  no  doubt,  that  every  member  of  Christ  is  bound  and 
obliged  to  perfect  holiness,  and  hath  the  means  of  fulfilling  it : 
and  however  far  he  comes  short  thereof,  he  must  take  the  guilt 
to  himself,  and  not  look  upon  it  as  an  ordinance  or  appoint- 
ment of  God,  as  a  necessary  imperfection  in  the  work  of  Christ, 
and  a  native  impotency  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  Now  this  is  the 
more  excellent  way  of  charity,  or  love,  which  the  apostle  com- 
mendeth  above  all  spiritual  gifts  :  it  is  the  knowledge  of  Christ, 
and  the  being  known  of  Him  ;  the  doing  the  will  of  the  Father  : 
for  the  want  of  which  He  shall  not  admit  into  the  kingdom 
many  who  in  that  day  shall  come  with  their  spiritual  gifts  in 
their  hand,  saying,  "  Have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name, 
and  in  thy  name  cast  out  devils,  and  in  thy  name  done  many 
wonderful  works  ?"  This  we  never  for  a  moment  gainsay  or 
undervalue,  while  we  insist  that,  besides  this,  there  is  yet  an- 
other thing  resident  in  the  Church ;  another  work  which  she 
has  to  do  besides  the  work  of  holiness  in  the  flesh.  We  hold 
the  highest  doctrine  here,  both  as  to  the  importance  of  this 
personal  holiness,  without  which  no  one  shall  see  the  Lord  ; 
and  of  its  measure,  even  perfectness,  whereof  love  is  the  bond. 
Let  no  one  say,  then,  that  we  undervalue  the  sacramental 
ministration  of  a  cleansed  soul  and  a  holy  body,  when  we 
insist  from  the  premises  laid  down  above,  that  there  is  another 
office  to  which  the  Church  is  called  besides  this,  and  another 
endowment  with  which  she  is  gifted  by  her  Lord  and  Husband  ; 
the  dowry,  not  of  holiness  only,  but  also  of  power.  And  for 
this  she  waited  until  He  Himself  should,  from  the  throne  of 
God,  shed  it  down  abundantly  upon  His  Church.  Into  both 
of  these  is  the  Church  baptized,  as  Peter  said  :  "  Repent  and 
be  baptized  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  remission,  or  putting  away,  of 
sin,  is  that  into  which  we  are  baptized,  as  a  thing  done  for  the 
world  by  Christ's  sacrifice  of  Himself;  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  that  which  to  faith  follows  thereon — though,  to  con- 
vince Peter  of  God's  equal  goodness  to  the  Gentiles,  it  was 
poured  out  upon  Cornelius  and  his  company  before  their 
baptism.    The  Samaritan  Church  had  the  gift  of  baptism  with- 


5o6       THE  CHURCH:  HER  ENDOWMENT. 

out  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  they  received  by  the  hands 
of  the  apostles  ;  and  thereby  we  perceive  that  the  Church  may 
exist  without  the  gift.  But  whether  it  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God 
that  she  should  so  exist,  let  any  one  judge,  after  perusing  the 
things  written  above.  We  have  shut  ourselves  out  by  unbelief 
from  the  enjoyment  of  one  great  part  of  our  dowry  ;  whereby 
not  only  are  we  straitened,  but  the  glory  of  our  Lord  and 
Husband  is  obscured,  the  world  is  deprived  of  its  witness  and 
testimony,  and  the  gracious  ends  of  God,  so  far  as  we  can, 
defeated  ;  and  guilt  is  upon  our  head,  as  baptized  men,  for 
not  using  that  which  we  are  baptized  into,  for  the  possession 
and  for  the  use  of  which  we  are  responsible. 


ON  THE 


GIFTS  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST 

COMMONLY  CALLED  SUPERNATURAL. 


ON  THE 


GIFTS    OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST 

COMMONLY  CALLED  SUPERNATURAL. 


'TPHOSE  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  we  formerly 
treated  of  under  the  head  of  the  Endowment  of  the 
Church,  are  by  some  thought  to  have  been  given  only  for 
a  season,  while  Christianity  was  making  way  in  the  world  : 
by  others  they  are  believed  to  have  been  given,  like  the  other 
gifts  and  callings  of  God,  without  repentance  and  revocation  ; 
and  that  the  Church  hath  them  now  in  as  full  right  as  ever, 
and  ought  to  be  exercising  them  with  as  great  diligence, 
and  for  the  very  same  ends,  as  did  the  apostles  and  primi- 
tive Christians.  The  only  way  of  determining  every  question 
of  Divine  truth  is  by  an  appeal  to  the  Word  of  God  ;  and 
most  especially  when,  like  this,  it  is  a  question  concerning 
the  will  and  mind  of  God  itself,  and  His  end  in  the  giving 
of  these  gifts.  No  one  knoweth  the  mind  of  God,  but  the 
Spirit  of  God ;  and  that  Spirit  testifieth  to  the  things  which 
are  written  in  His  Word.  God  alone  is  competent  to  explain 
His  own  intentions '  no  man,  nor  council  of  men,  can  help  us 
here.  And  as  this  is  purely  a  question,  as  to  God's  intention 
in  respect  to  these  miraculous  gifts,  it  can  in  no  other  way  be 
settled  than  by  an  appeal  to  His  own  declaration  thereof. 
Not  to  contradict  any  man's  opinion,  therefore,  but  to  dis- 
cover God's  own  mind,  and  give  to  all  men  the  true  grounds 


5IO  THE  GIFTS  OF 

for  forming  an  opinion  and  a  belief,  is  our  object  in  the  fol- 
lowing inquiry. 

I.  The  first  time  that  these  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are 
referred  to  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  is  in  the  68th  Psalm, 
where  it  is  thus  written  concerning  them :  "  Thou  hast 
ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led  captivity  captive :  thou  hast 
received  gifts  for  men  ;  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also,  that  the 
Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them."  That  this  passage 
refers  to  the  ascension  of  our  blessed  Lord,  and  to  the  "  pro- 
mise of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  which  He  then  received  from  the 
Father,  and  shed  down  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  is  expressly 
declared  by  the  apostle  Paul,  in  the  4th  chapter  of  his 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  which  contains  likewise  a  full  com- 
mentary upon  it.  Having,  then,  the  Holy  Ghost  both  for 
our  author  and  our  commentator,  let  us  endeavour  to  find 
out  the  mind  of  God.  It  is  the  end  and  purpose  of  God 
in  the  giving  of  these  gifts  to  Christ,  and  Christ's  end  in 
giving  them  to  us,  that  we  are  in  quest  of:  which  in  the 
psalm  is  given  with  great  distinctness  in  these  words, — 
"  Thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men ;  yea,  for  the  rebellious 
also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them."  These 
words  are  so  important,  as  containing  the  bare  and  naked 
end  of  God,  that  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  have 
them  literally  translated.  Taking  the  marginal  reading  of 
our  English  Bibles,  and  dropping  the  words  in  italics 
which  are  supplied  by  the  translators,  it  standeth  thus,  word 
for  word  after  the  original :  "  Thou  hast  received  gifts  in 
man ;  yea,  the  rebellious  even,  for  an  habitation  (shechinah) 
of  Jah-Elohim."  The  latter  part  of  this  sentence,  which 
contains  the  end  of  these  received  gifts,  is  very  plain,  "  For 
a  habitation  of  the  Lord  God  ; "  asserting  that  Christ  had 
received  these  gifts,  in  order  with  them  to  make  a  habita- 
tion for  Jehovah-God.  In  some  way  or  other,  therefore,  this 
is  the  great  end  for  which  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  re- 
ceived by  Christ  upon  His  ascension,  were  given, — to  con- 
struct for  God  a  place  to  dwell  in.  What  is  the  meaning  of 
Christ's  obtaining,  for  God,  a  place  to  dwell  in,  is  another  in- 
quiry, which  we  shall  come  to  in  due  time ;  but  that  this  is 


rilE  HOL  V  GHOST.  5  1 1 

the  very  end  and  purpose  of  the  gifts,  is  declared  as  distinctly 
as  words  can  express  it.  If  I  were  to  say  to  my  son,  "  Take 
these,  and  make  for  rrte  a  dwelling-place ;"  no  one  would  have 
a  doubt  what  I  intended  my  gift  to  be  applied  to :  but  if  we 
receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater ;  and 
this  witness  is,  that  when  Christ  ascended  up  on  high,  victori- 
ous over  death  and  him  who  had  the  power  of  death,  leading 
captivity  captive,  crowned  with  the  spoils  of  the  grave ;  in 
this  His  resurrection-state  the  Father  gave  Him  certain  gifts, 
for  the  purpose  of  constructing  a  habitation  for  Him.  The 
end  of  the  gifts  is  what  we  are  searching  after.  Let  it  be 
understood  that  we  have  found  it  from  God's  own  Word  :  it  is, 
to  prepare  God  a  tabernacle,  or  house,  or  habitation. 

The  former  part  of  the  sentence — "  Thou  hast  received  gifts 
in  man  ;  yea,  the  rebellious  even" — is  not  so  easy  of  interpre- 
tation. But,  fortunately,  it  concerneth  not  our  inquiry  so 
nearly  ;  which  is,  not  as  to  the  fact  of  His  having  received  the 
gifts,  but  as  to  the  end  for  which  He  received  them.  Yet, 
though  harder  to  be  understood,  it  is  with  the  apostle's  com- 
mentary made  comparatively  plain,  and,  being  interpreted, 
helps  mainly  to  the  resolution  of  the  question  which  ariseth 
out  of  the  former  conclusion,  And  how  with  these  gifts  is 
Christ  to  build  for  Jehovah  a  habitation  ?  The  apostle's 
commentary,  taking  the  whole  of  it — that  is,  the  first  sixteen 
verses  of  the  fourth  chapter — is  to  the  effect,  that  the  Church 
is  one  thing,  Avhether  viewed  as  a  structure  building  up,  or  as  a 
body  in  a  state  of  growth,  in  which,  and  through  which,  and 
of  which,  God  the  Father  is  the  All  in  all.  In  the  conclusion 
of  the  2d  chapter,  which  is  the  immediate  context  (for  the 
3d  chapter  is  properly  marked  off  in  our  English  Bible  as  a 
parenthesis,)  he  had  adopted  the  former  figure  of  a  habitation, 
suggested,  I  have  no  doubt,  by  the  passage  of  the  psalm 
before  us  which  it  was  in  His  mind  to  quote.  And  he  ex- 
presseth  himself  thus :  "  Fellow-citizens  of  the  saints,  and 
inmates  of  God's  house,  ....  builded,  as  a  house,  upon  the 
foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  him- 
self being  the  head  of  the  corner ;  on  whom  the  whole  house- 
structure,  fitly  framed  together,  increaseth  into  a  holy  temple 
in  the  Lord,  in  whom  even  you  are  built  into  the  house,  for  a 


512  THE  GIFTS  OF 

habitation  of  God  in  the  Spirit."  These  words  are  a  perfect 
commentary  upon  that  part  of  the  prophetic  oracle  before  us, 
which  is  concerned  about  the  habitation  of  God,  to  be  con- 
structed by  Christ  with  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  He 
received  from  the  Father.  That  habitation  is  the  Church 
beyond  all  question.  And  it  explains,  moreover,  what  is  the 
meaning  of  these  words,  "  yea,  the  rebellious  also."  The  sole 
object  of  the  apostle  in  that  2d  chapter,  is  to  explain  how  the 
Gentiles  should  come  to  be  builded  into  that  house  along 
with  the  Jews.  He  calls  them  "  children  of  wrath,"  "  aliens 
from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,"  "  without  God  in  the 
world,"  and  many  other  names,  significant  all  of  enmity 
towards  God,  rebellion  against  His  law,  and  obedience  to  the 
prince  of  this  world.  He  then  explains  how  this  thraldom 
and  alienation  and  enmity  were  done  away  in  the  cross  of 
Christ,  when  He  reconciled  both  Jew  and  Gentile  unto  God 
in  one  body.  This  is  the  "  leading  captivity  captive  "  of  the 
psalm,  and  the  breaking  of  that  spell  of  Satan  which  leagued 
men  against  their  Maker.  And  then  he  shews  that  they, 
"  even  they,"  "  even  the  rebellious,"  constituted  a  part  of  this 
house,  or  habitation,  which  He  is  constructing  for  God  with 
those  gifts  which  He  received  when  He  ascended  up  on  high. 
The  discourse  in  the  2d  chapter  explains  likewise  that  other 
word  of  the  prophetic  oracle,  "  in  the  man  ; "  which  is,  I 
think,  parallel  with  the  word  "  in  his  flesh,"  (ver.  15  ;)  wherein 
He  is  declared  to  have  abolished  the  enmity,  and  to  have 
reconciled  these  enemies,  or  rebellious  persons,  and  prepared 
them  for  being  builded  into  God's  habitation :  it  is  also 
parallel  with  the  word  "  in  one  body,"  by  offering  which  upon 
the  cross  he  put  away  the  enmity  which  prevented  men  from 
dwelling  with  God,  and  God  from  dwelling  in  men,  and  so 
prepared  the  way  for  constructing  the  "  habitation  of  God  by 
the  Spirit." 

Apply  now  these  lights  to  the  elucidation  of  the  enigmati- 
cal verse  of  the  psalm,  and  it  clears  itself  up  thus : — "  Thou 
hast  ascended  on  high,  Thou  hast  captured  the  captivity.  Thou 
hast  received  gifts  in  man :"  all  these  things  as  a  man,  or  in 
manhood,  or  by  becoming  man.  Thou  hast  done  in  Thy  body, 
in  Thy  flesh.     If  any  one  think  that  this  is  too  distinct  a 


THE  HOL  V  GHOST.  5 1 3 

notice  of  the  incarnation  for  so  early  a  prophet,  let  him 
correct  his  judgment  by  the  40th  Psalm  ;  and  remember  that 
the  Jews  had  a  light  upon  the  subject  of  the  incarnation,  de- 
rived from  their  prophets,  which  might  put  us  Christians  to 
shame.  Then  it  is  added,  "  even  rebels."  That  is,  "  He  hath 
received  gifts,  and  even  rebels  :"  not  only  the  stipulated  re- 
ward of  God's  own  people,  but  even  the  rebellious  Gentiles 
hath  He  received  as  His  gift  in  manhood  :  as  it  is  written,  "  I 
will  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance."  And  the 
apostle  Paul  accordingly  labours  to  shew  how  into  that 
inheritance  "  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  in 
the  saints,"  (Eph.  i.  18,)  "the  rebels"  even,  the  Gentiles  also, 
were  introduced,  and  all  builded  up  together  into  one  house 
for  the  inhabitation  of  God.  And  having  done  this  in  the 
second  chapter,  he  is  so  enwrapped  in  the  glorious  mystery, 
and  so  enraptured  with  the  honour  bestowed  on  him  of  being 
its  unfolder,  that  he  occupies  the  whole  of  the  third  chapter 
with  a  digression,  to  disburden  his  heart  of  its  thanksgivings 
for  the  same.  Then,  returning  to  his  task  again,  he  begins 
the  fourth  chapter  by  reminding  them  of  this  their  high  call- 
ing, to  be  God's  temple  and  habitation ;  and,  the  more  to 
prevent  all  schism,  as  well  between  Jew  and  Gentile  as  be- 
tween one  another,  he  enumerates  their  sevenfold  unity, — 
"  One  body,  one  spirit,  one  hope  of  their  calling,  one  Lord, 
one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of  all ;  he  who 
is  upon  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  all  of  you."  Therefore, 
taking  up  the  figure  of  the  body,  which  is  better  fitted  than 
that  of  the  house  for  the  reproving  of  schism  and  envy 
arising  out  of  the  diversity  of  their  gifts  ("  to  each  of  }'ou  was 
[not  is]  given  grace,  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of 
Christ,"  ver.  7,)  he  proceeds,  by  the  very  quotation  of  the 
psalm,  to  shew  them  that  these  gifts  were  all  derived  from 
Christ,  and  distributed  according  to  His  pleasure.  But  upon 
mentioning  the  ascension,  the  Spirit  suggests  to  him  another 
prophetic  psalm,  which,  being  introduced  at  this  point  of  his 
argument,  will  give  additional  force  to  the  great  mystery  of 
the  membership  of  Christ  in  one  body,  which  he  is  enforcing; 
and  this,  according  to  his  rapid  and  full-minded  way,  he 
introduceth  in  a  parenthesis  :  "  Now  that  he  ascended,  what 
vol..  V.  2  K 


514  THE  GIFTS  OF 

is  it  but  that  he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of 
the  earth  ?  He  that  descended  is  the  same  also  that  ascended 
up  far  above  all  heavens,  that  he  might  fill  all  things,"  (Eph. 
iv.  9,  10.)  The  psalm  to  which  he  now  refers  is  beyond 
question  the  139th,  where  Christ  giveth  glory  to  God  for 
building  up  to  Him  His  body  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth 
— that  is,  in  the  grave,  where  the  work  is  finished  by  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  being  now  begun  in  the  regenera- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  The  words  are  these  :  "  My  substance  was 
not  hid  from  thee  when  I  was  made  in  secret,  and  curiously 
wrought  in  the  lowest  parts  of- the  earth  :  thine  eyes  did  see 
my  substance  :  yet  being  unperfect ;  and  in  thy  book  all  my 
members  were  written  which  in  continuance  were  fashioned, 
when  as  yet  there  was  none  of  them,"  (verses  15,  16.)  If  any 
one  doubt  whether  it  be  proper  to  speak  of  the  members  and 
the  head  as  one  Christ,  he  is  referred  to  the  12th  chapter  of 
the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  ver.  12  ;  and  if  he  doubt 
(for  there  is  nothing  but  doubt,  arising  mainly  from  ignorance) 
whether  it  be  proper  for  the  psalms  thus  to  unite  the  mem- 
bers and  the  head  in  one  subject,  he  is  referred  to  all  the 
psalms  whatsoever  which  speak  of  Christ  as  confessing  sin — 
the  40th  and  the  69th,  for  instance.  The  apostle,  having  thus 
gathered  in  the  139th  Psalm  an  additional  ground  upon 
which  to  rest  his  argument  from  the  body  and  the  members, 
doth  proceed  to  it  in  a  way  which  gives  new  light  and  con- 
firmation upon  that  which  hath  been  concluded  above  con- 
cerning the  prophecy  in  the  69th  Psalm  :  "  He  received  gifts," 
saith  he,  "  and  gave  some  indeed  apostles,  and  some  prophets, 
and  some  evangelists,  and  some  pastors  and  teachers."  The 
gifts,  then,  are  men.  This  makes  all  clear  in  the  psalm, 
where  it  is  said,  "  He  received  gifts  in  man,  and  even  rebels'.' 
How  very  literal  is  an  apostolical  interpreter !  He  does  not 
find  it  necessary,  like  our  translators,  (however  excellent,  and 
they  are  the  most  excellent,)  to  reject  the  literal  translation, 
"  in  the  man,"  and  adopt,  for  the  sake  of  a  meaning,  "  for 
man:"  which,  besides  being  against  the  structure  of  the 
original,  sacrifices  the  truth,  that  the  persons  to  whom  the 
gifts  are  given  are  themselves  likewise  gifts  of  God  to  the 
man :  whereas  the  apostle,  adhering  to  the  letter,  makes  the 


THE  HOL  V  GHOS  T.  515 

persons  also  to  be  gifts — some  of  whom  are  apostles,  others 
prophets,  others  evangelists,  others  pastors  and  teachers, 
others  (to  complete  the  catalogue  from  i  Cor.  xii.  28) 
workers  of  miracles,  others  teachers,  others  helps,  others 
governors,  others  speakers  with  tongues,  and  others  inter- 
preters of  tongues.  Then  he  propoundeth  the  end  of  such 
variety  to  be  for  the  perfect  joining  together  (so  the  word  is 
translated  in  i  Cor.  i.  1 1)  of  the  saints.  It  is  remarkable  that 
the  same  word  is  used  by  the  apostle  of  the  body  of  Christ, 
when  quoting  from  the  40th  Psalm,  in  Heb.  x.  5,  "  A  body 
hast  thou  prepared  for  me."  I  do  not  think  that  it  means 
for  the  perfecting  of  every  saint,  but  for  their  perfect  articula- 
tion into  the  one  body  of  Christ ;  for  the  bringing  about  of 
their  unity  through  means  of  a  diversity  of  gifts,  so  as  that 
one  could  not  do  without  another,  as  is  largely  set  forth  in 
the  1 2th  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  But 
the  apostle  adds  his  own  explanation ;  for  the  latter  two 
clauses  of  ver.  12  are  not  repetition,  but  explanation  of  the 
preceding,  as  the  change  of  the  preposition  sheweth  :  "  unto 
a  work  of  service  (deaconship,  mutually  helpful  to,  and  serv- 
ing one  another — ■'  he  that  is  a  chief  be  as  he  that  doth  serve') 
— unto  the  building  up  as  a  house  the  body  of  the  Church ; 
until  the  whole  come  into  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  the 
knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  perfect  man,  unto  the 
measure  of  the  size  of  the  fulness  of  the  Christ." 

Without  going. further  into  the  apostle's  commentary  upon 
the  passage  before  us,  it  is  abundantly  manifest  from  the 
premises  that  the  habitation  of  God,  which  Christ  was  to 
construct  for  His  Father,  out  of  the  gifts  which  He  received 
when  He  ascended  up  on  high,  is  the  Church,  His  body,  the 
fulness  of  the  election  which  the  Father  had  given  to  Him 
for  His  inheritance.  And  it  is  further  evident,  that  the  unity 
of  these  many  members  is  bound  together  by  the  wise  dis- 
tribution which  He  makes  of  the  Spirit,  given  to  Him  of  the 
Father,  among  the  members  of  the  body,  in  such  wise  as 
that  one  shall  be  necessary  to  the  help  and  support  of  the 
other,  and,  all  together  co-operating,  shall  make  the  body  to 
grow,  and  wax  like  the  body  of  a  child,  from  its  rudiments 
then    forming  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,    until  it  should 


5i6  ■  THE  GIFTS  OF 

attain  unto  the  measure  of  its  appointed  fulness — that  is, 
until  all  the  election  should  be  brought  in,  and  the  bride  of 
the  Lamb,  the  new  Jerusalem,  which  is  the  tabernacle  or 
habitation  of  God  for  ever,  should  be  completed.  If  you 
take  the  figure  of  a  house,  then  it  is  a  house  composed 
of  living  stones,  (i  Pet.  ii.  5,)  whose  union  or  cement  is  the 
Spirit ;  whence  it  is  called  a  spiritual  house,  and  a  habita- 
tion of  God  in  the  Spirit :  if  it  is  a  body,  God  is  the  soul  of 
it,  upon,  in,  and  through  all  the  members,  in-working  all 
things  in  all  the  members,  (iCor.  xii.  6  ;)  His  body,  to  ex- 
press His  mind,  and  word,  and  action,  for  ever  and  ever  ;  and 
now,  in  this  present  age,  intended  to  serve  that  Almighty 
effect  in  the  sight  of  this  dark  and  erroneous  world.  Where- 
fore the  apostle,  giving  to  the  Corinthian  Church  orders  con- 
cerning the  behaviour  that  befitted  them  when  they  were 
gathered  together,  hath  these  words  declaratory  of  the 
doctrine  which  I  am  now  advancing,  that  Christ's  work  with 
the  Spirit  is  to  prepare  for  God  such  a  living  temple,  such  a 
speaking,  acting  body,  as  shall  declare  His  presence  to  every 
beholder :  "  But  if  all  prophesy,  and  there  come  in  one  that 
believeth  not,  or  one  unlearned,  he  is  convinced  of  all,  he  is 
judged  of  all  :  and  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  made 
manifest  ;  and  so,  falling  down  on  his  face,  he  will  worship 
God,  and  report  that  GOD  IS  IN  YOU  of  a  truth,"  (i  Cor.  xiv. 
24,  25.) 

I  do  not  understand  how  any  one  can  resist  such  a  breadth 
of  doctrine  as  these  passages  of  Scripture  bring  to  the  believ- 
ing mind  ;  and  therefore  I  have  nothing  to  say  in  the  way  of 
strengthening  or  confirming  what  hath  been  deduced  from 
merely  bringing  one  passage  of  Scripture  to  face  another.  It 
only  remains,  therefore,  that  I  say  a  word  or  two  upon  the  way 
in  which  these  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  received  from  the 
Father  on  the  ascension,  and  shed  down  upon  the  Church  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  do  work  together  in  Christ's  hand  the 
end  of  making  a  house  for  God,  a  temple  where  "  spiritual 
sacrifices  may  be  offered  up  to  Him,  acceptable  by  Jesus 
Christ."  And  this  seems  to  me  to  consist  in  two  things  : 
the  one  common  to  all  the  persons  who  compose  the  unity, 
the  other  proper  and  peculiar  to  them  severally.     That  which 


THE  II OL  V  GHOST.  5 1  7 

is  common  to  them  all  is  their  life,  whereby  they  become 
lively  stones,  and  cleave  to  one  another.  This  in  common 
language  would  be  called  the  cement,  or  band,  which  binds 
the  stones  together  into  one  fabric  fit  for  inhabitation.  As 
for  the  stones,  Christ  doth  not  furnish  them,  but  the  Father. 
They  are  the  Father's  creation,  fallen  into  disorder  and  dis- 
union, out  with  Him  and  out  with  one  another  :  all  ruins  and 
rubbish,  dark,  and  divested  of  their  Creator's  presence,  warring 
against  His  holy  mind,  and  cast  out  from  His  heavenly  abode. 
Christ  "  having,  in  the  man,"  by  doing  the  will  of  God  in 
flesh,  and  offering  it  a  sacrifice  upon  the  accursed  tree,  done 
away  with  the  enmity,  and  brought  reconciliation  to  pass, 
doth,  when  He  ascendeth  into  heaven,  receive  the  Holy  Spirit 
from  the  Father,  that  with  it  He  may  take  as  many  as  the 
Father  will  give  Him,  and  make  them  so  to  cohere  together 
in  the  bands  of  mutual  charity,  work  together  the  will  of  God, 
and  manifest  forth  His  glory,  as  that  He  shall  need  nothing 
else  to  make  His  fulness  and  perfectness  known  in  the  sight 
of  all  His  creatures.  The  first  thing  that  Christ  doth  for 
these  disjointed  fragments,  is  to  give  them  a  law  of  coherence, 
which  He  doth  by  imparting  to  them  that  principle  of  life 
which  is  in  Himself.  Then  are  they  in  a  condition  separately 
to  love  God,  to  love  one  another  ;  and  to  perfect  holiness,  with- 
out which  they  could  neither  see,  nor  enjoy,  nor  shew  forth 
God.  This  is  like  the  cutting  and  polishing  of  the  stones  in 
the  quarry,  and  the  preparing  of  the  mortar  to  bind  them  into 
one.  Then  comes  the  Master-builder's  work,  to  lift  up  the 
fabric  in  its  just  and  fair  proportions,  to  found  it  surely,  and 
to  bind  it  together  with  corner-stones ;  to  fashion  and  to 
frame  it,  and  to  bring  forth  the  work  in  all  the  perfection  of 
beauty  and  majesty.  The  arches  and  the  columns,  the  walls 
and  the  ceilings,  the  floors  and  the  domes,  must  all  have  their 
proper  places  and  adjustments,  in  order  to  bring  out  one 
symmetrical  whole  :  for  it  is  to  be  a  house  for  expressing  the 
mind  of  God,  And  not  the  house  only,  but  the  priesthood 
also,  is  to  come  forth  under  the  hand  of  the  same  Divine 
Architect :  therefore  that  which  in  one  verse  of  Peter  is  thus 
described,  "  Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual 
house,   an  holy  priesthood,   to   offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices, 


51.8  THE  GIFTS  OF 

acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ,"  is  a  few  verses  forward 
described  thus, — "  But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal 
priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people  ;  that  ye  should 
shew  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  you  out  of 
darkness  into  His  marvellous  light."  The  Church  is  to  be 
not  only  the  container  of  the  manifested  God,  but  she  is  the 
actor  of  His  works,  and  the  utterer  of  His  wisdom :  and 
to  accomplish  this,  Christ,  when  He  ascended  up  on  high, 
received  the  Seven  Spirits,  the  fulness  and  completeness  of 
the  vital,  active  Godhead.  This  is  His  occupation  in  heaven, 
to  build  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  Lord  out  of  the  materials 
which  He  hath  impregnated  with  His  own  life.  And  the 
Church  is  this  temple :  we  are  it ;  we  on  earth  are  it.  The 
idea  and  the  end  of  the  Church  is  to  be  such  a  thing. 
Christ  hath  either  failed  to  do  His  Father's  will  since  His 
ascension,  or  the  Spirit  hath  failed,  or  the  materials  have 
succeeded  in  defeating  the  Architect ;  or  else  the  Church  is 
this  building  of  God,  where  God  is  heard  in  His  manifold 
wisdom,  and  seen  in  His  various  actings  ; — His  wisdom,  in 
this  membership  having  the  word  of  wisdom  ;  His  knowledge, 
in  this  membership  having  the  word  of  knowledge ;  His 
truth,  in  this  membership  having  the  gift  of  faith  ;  His  health, 
in  this  membership  having  the  gift  of  healing ;  His  supre- 
macy of  spirits,  in  this  membership  having  the  discernment 
of  spirits ;  His  voice,  in  this  membership  having  the  gift  of 
tongues ;  and  His  understanding,  in  this  membership  having 
the  interpretation  of  tongues.  But  I  am  not  the  Master-builder, 
to  scan  the  work  or  shew  the  adjustment  of  its  several  parts  : 
I  do  only  point  to  the  variety  of  offices,  the  diversity  of 
occupations,  the  mutual  subministration,  as  being  necessary 
in  order  to  make  a  habitation  or  house  for  any  one,  how  much 
more  for  God.  If  to  give  niy  spirit  a  proper  habitation  for 
dwelling  in,  and  a  fit  organ  for  uttering  itself  by,  this  body  of 
mine,  so  curiously  fashioned  and  exquisitely  adjusted,  part  to 
part,  so  various  in  its  organisations,  was  all  necessary ;  how 
much  more,  to  make  a  proper  habitation  for  the  Eternal  God, 
and  a  fit  organ  for  expressing  His  various  mind  and  action 
in  the  sight  of  all  the  creatures  which  He  hath  formed  !  This 
wonderful    office,    this    most   wonderful    office,    serveth    the 


THE  HOL  V  GHOST.  5 1 9 

Church,  if  there  be  any  truth  in  Scripture :  and  to  fit  her  for 
serving  this  office,  Christ  received  the  Seven  Spirits  when  He 
ascended  up  on  high,  and  bestoweth  the  various  gifts  through- 
out the  Church  by  the  which  that  one  Spirit  is  manifested. 

II.  The  next  passage  in  which  God  deh'vers  His  mind  upon 
the  subject  of  the  supernatural  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  in 
these  words  of  the  8th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  ver.  18  :  "  Behold,  I 
and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me  are  for  signs 
and  for  wonders  in  Israel  from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  dwell- 
eth  in  mount  Zion."  That  this  refers  to  Christ  and  His  Church 
is  expressly  declared  by  the  apostle  Paul,  in  the  2d  chapter  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  :  so  that  here  again  we  have  the 
Holy  Ghost  both  for  the  Author  and  the  Commentator,  and 
may  surely  obtain  some  insight  into  the  mind  of  God,  But 
because  I  have  heard  some,  to  whom  I  have  proposed  this 
passage  as  a  light,  take  objection  that  "  signs  and  wonders" 
may  have  no  respect  at  all  to  miraculous  endowments,  but 
merely  to  the  peculiarity  and  singularity  of  His  disciples  in  the 
midst  of  the  unbelieving  world,  I  count  it  good  here  to  observe, 
that  in  no  instance  doth  the  expression  "  signs  and  wonders  " 
signify  in  Scripture  any  thing  but  supernatural  acts  and  ap- 
pearances. In  proof  of  which  I  refer  to  these  passages  :  Matt, 
xxiv.  24 ;  Mark  xiii.  22  ;  John  iv.  48  ;  Acts  ii.  22,  43,  iv.  30, 
vi.  8,  vii.  36  ;  Rom.  xv.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  12  ;  Heb.  ii.  4;  in  all 
of  which  the  words  used  here  in  the  Septuagint  for  "  signs 
and  wonders "  occur  as  the  ordinary  and  constant  form  of 
words  for  supernatural  demonstrations  of  the  power  of  God  : 
nor  is  there  a  single  instance  to  the  contrary  in  all  the  Scrip- 
tures. Let  us,  then,  with  the  more  confidence  examine  for 
what  ends  of  God  those  powers  and  gifts  commonly  called 
extraordinary  are  declared  in  this  passage  to  have  been  given. 

The  prophecy  is  concerning  Him  whose  name  is  Immanuel, 
God  with  us;  against  whom  it  is  said,  (ver.  8-13,)  that  the 
nations  shall  confederate,  and  against  His  land,  and  against  His 
people,  who  are  exhorted  not  to  look  to  any  human  help,  nor 
to  form  any  confederacies  in  their  turn,  but  to  sanctify  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  and  to  make  Him  their  fear  and  their  dread. 
Then  follows,  from  ver.  14,  a  glorious  promise  of  Immanuel 


520  THE  GIFTS  OF 

and  Immanuel's  doings.  And,  first,  He  is  proposed  as  a  sanc- 
tuary :  "  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary."  And  so  spake  He  of 
Himself  the  very  first  time  He  presented  Himself  at  Jerusalem, 
saying,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise 
it  up  :"  "  He  spake  of  the  temple  of  His  body."  Instead,  how- 
ever, of  receiving  Him  as  such,  it  is  prophesied  that  He  should 
be  "  for  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  for  a  rock  of  offence  to  both 
the  houses  of  Israel ;  for  a  gin  and  for  a  snare  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Jerusalem  :  and  many  among  them  shall  stumble,  and  fall, 
and  be  broken,  and  be  snared,  and  be  taken,"  (ver.  14,  15.) 
Now,  it  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  passage  of  Peter's  First 
Epistle,  to  which  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  refer,  this 
very  prophecy  is  quoted  (chap,  ii.  8)  in  a  context  which  treats  of 
Christ  and  His  Church  as  the  spiritual  house,  and  the  holy 
priesthood  of  the  house  :  which  coincides  so  exactly  with  the 
context  in  Isaiah,  where  He  is  presented  as  a  "  sanctuary," 
that  I  have  no  doubt  the  one  suggested  the  other ;  or  rather, 
to  speak  more  faithfully,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  apostle 
explained  more  fully  what  He  had  spoken  in  the  prophet. 
Take  now  this,  also,  in  connexion  with  the  68th  Psalm  and  its 
commentary,  as  explained  above,  and  a  new  strength  will  be 
given  to  the  declaration  of  that  psalm,  that  when  Christ  had 
ascended  up  on  high,  and  led  captivity  captive,  the  office  to 
which,  the  Father  promoted  Him,  and  for  which  He  furnished 
Him  with  the  Seven  Spirits  of  God,  and  which  He  is  now  ful- 
filling by  the  distribution  of  the  same,  is  the  office  of  building 
for  God  a  house  of  habitation,  a  tabernacle  wherein  He  may 
abide  for  ever,  even  the  new  Jerusalem,  the  city  of  God,  which 
hath  the  glory  of  God,  and  is  God's  tabernacle,  being  also  the 
bride  of  the  Lamb,  the  completeness  of  the  elect,  or  Church 
of  the  living  God.  When  the  prophet  hath  thus  proposed 
Christ  as  a  sanctuary,  and  declared  that  he  would  prove  to 
both  the  houses  of  Israel  a  stone  of  stumbling,  he  proceedeth 
to  explain  what  should  be  the  privileges  and  prerogatives  of 
those  who  should  receive  Immanuel  as  their  teacher,  and, 
being  washed  and  quickened  by  His  word,  built  up  as  lively 
stones  into  that  sanctuary  of  God.  The  first  of  these  is,  to 
possess  the  testimony,  or  oracle  of  truth,  and  the  law  of  holi- 
ness, and  love  among  themselves ;  which  is  thus  beautifully 


THE  II OL  V  GHOST.  521 

and  forcibly  expressed  :  "  Bind  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law 
among  my  disciples."  Seeing  the  houses  of  Israel  will  no 
longer  keep  the  oracles  of  God  and  the  law  of  holiness,  let 
the  sacred  trust  pass  over  from  them  to  my  disciples.  This, 
accordingly,  did  take  effect  from  the  time  of  our  Lord's  resur- 
rection, and  hath  continued  until  now.  Japheth  is  dwelling 
in  the  tents  of  Shem.  The  glorious  advantages  of  "  the  adop- 
tion, and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  the  giving  of  the  law, 
and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises,  and  the  keeping  of 
the  oracles  of  God,"  have  passed  over  from  the  nation  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham  and  the  flesh  of  Christ,  unto  the  children  of 
Abraham's  faith  and  the  disciples  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  The 
testimony  is  bound  up  and  limited  unto,  the  law  is  made 
honourable,  and  practised  only  among,  the  disciples  of  the 
Lord  upon  this  earth.  But  it  is  immediately  added,  that 
only  for  a  time,  and  not  for  aye,  shall  the  children  of  Israel 
as  a  nation  be  so  rejected  and  broken  :  ver.  17,  "  And  I  will 
wait  upon  the  Lord,  that  hideth  his  face  from  the  house  of 
Jacob,  and  I  will  look  for  him."  Lnmanuel,  though  sore  dis- 
appointed, as  we  learn  by  the  49th  chapter  of  Lsaiah,  that  the 
house  of  Israel  should  not  then  have  been  gathered,  is  how- 
ever contented  with  His  Father's  disposal,  sits  down  at  His 
right  hand,  and  waits  until  He  shall  lift  up  again  the  light  of 
His  countenance  upon  the  house  of  Jacob  :  for  which  happy 
day  He  looketh  earnestly  forward,  when  "  He  shall  come  out 
of  Zion  the  deliverer,  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from 
Jacob,  and  all  Israel  shall  be  saved." 

These  things,  however,  are  but  preliminary  to  the  matter 
properly  in  hand,  yet  absolutely  necessary  to  the  understand- 
ing of  the  dignity  and  the  tenor  of  the  prophetic  strain  ;  which, 
having  thus  given  the  great  end  of  Christ  as  a  sanctuary,  and 
the  great  reward  of  His  disciples,  as  the  priesthood  in  that 
sanctuary, — having  the  oracle,  (that  is,  speaking  forth  the  very 
word  of  God,  which  formerly  issued  from  between  the  cheru- 
bim,) and  having  the  law  (that  is,  the  very  mind  of  God)  in 
their  inward  parts, — doth  proceed  to  set  forth  another  aspect 
of  the  office  which  Christ  and  His  disciples  were  designed  of 
God  to  fulfil :  "  Behold,  I,  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord 
hath  given  me,  are  for  signs  and  for  wonders  in  Israel  from 


522  THE  GIFTS  OF 

the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  dwelleth  in  mount  Zion."  Formerly 
the  figure  was,  Christ  the  temple,  and  His  disciples  having  the 
oracle  and  law  of  the  temple,  (uttering  the  word  and  accom- 
plishing the  sei-vice  of  God  ;)  which  answers  well  to  the  apos- 
tolic doctrine  that  Christ  is  both  Foundation  and  Head  of  the 
corner ;  and  likewise  to  the  Apocalyptic  vision  of  the  new 
Jerusalem,  the  glorified  Church,  which  had  no  temple,  for  the 
Lamb  is  the  temple  thereof.  Now  the  figure  is  of  Christ  and 
His  children,  the  children  whom  the  Father  hath  given  Him ; 
according  to  another  prophecy,  "  When  thou  shalt  make  his 
soul  an  offering  for  sin  he  shall  see  his  seed  ;"  and  according 
to  the  declaration  of  the  evangelist,  "  To  them  that  believed 
gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God  ;"  according,  also, 
to  the  name  which  He  receives  in  this  same  strain  of  prophecy, 
"  Everlasting  Father,"  or  "  Father  of  the  age  to  come."  The 
apostle  Paul  saw  such  a  preciousness  in  this  relation  between 
Christ  and  His  people,  that  he  seizeth  it  at  once,  in  the  2d 
chapter  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  as  a  stronghold  of  the 
truth  of  Christ's  unity  with  us  in  flesh,  and  in  mortal  flesh, 
saying,  "  Behold  I  and  the  children  which  God  hath  given 
me.  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh 
and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same  ; 
that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of 
death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver  them  who  through  fear 
of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage,"  (Heb. 
ii.  13-15.)  A  relationship  of  such  strength  and  endearment 
will  not  be  mentioned  in  our  prophet  for  mere  accidental  or 
casual  purposes,  but  for  some  high  and  solemn  end  :  and  what 
is  this  .''  It  is  expressed  in  these  words,  "  are  for  signs  and 
wonders;"  which  expression,  as  we  have  shewn  above,  in  all 
cases  signifies  supernatural  acts  and  appearances.  As  His 
children,  therefore,  we  with  Him  are  called  to  be  for  signs  and 
wonders — that  is,  to  minister  the  supernatural  manifestation 
of  the  power  of  God  ;  to  be  the  hand  of  God  for  action,  as  we 
are  His  house  for  habitation  ;  to  be  the  body  in  which  dwelleth 
the  Spirit  of  God  in  all  goodness  and  righteousness  and  truth  ; 
in  which,  also,  and  in  all  the  members  of  which,  God  himself 
worketh  all  signs  and  wonders  and  mighty  acts  in  the  sight  of 
men.     I  say,  as  an  interpreter  of  God's  holy  word,  that  who- 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  523 

sover  will  limit  the  office  of  being  for  signs  and  wonders,  as  if 
it  were  not  the  calling  of  all  the  children,  doth  bereave  the 
holy  text  of  its  substance,  and  might  as  well  maintain  that 
His  disciples  are,  not  all,  but  only  some  of  them,  for  the  main- 
taining of  the  testimony  and  the  practising  of  the  law.  Not 
with  less,  but  rather  with  more  observation  and  circumstance, 
is  our  privilege  to  be  for  signs  and  wonders  introduced,  than 
our  privilege  to  be  for  a  law  and  testimony. 

This  being  allowed,  two  questions  arise  thereon :  the  first, 
What  connexion  hath  this  office  or  function  of  the  super- 
natural agent  with  the  relation  of  our  being  children  unto 
Christ  .-*  The  answer  is,  That  the  children  ever  exhibit  the 
powers  and  faculties  of  the  Father.  Now,  Christ  is  our 
Father,  not  as  the  mortal  man,  but  as  the  risen  man  ;  not  as 
flesh  and  blood,  for  we  are  not  born  again  of  flesh  and  blood, 
but  as  the  quickening  Spirit  who  begetteth  us  for  God.  Our 
new  life  holdeth  of  His  risen  glory.  It  is  a  life,  indeed,  lived 
on  the  earth  in  flesh  and  blood — and  therefore  regeneration 
is  reckoned  by  our  Lord  amongst  the  earthly  things — but 
the  sustaining  principle  and  the  fatherhood  of  it  is  from 
heaven.  That  Word  which  quickeneth  is  not  from  earth,  but 
from  heaven :  as  it  is  written,  "  For  if  they  escaped  not  who 
refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we 
escape  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven," 
(Heb.  xii.  25.)  We  are  wedded  to  the  risen  body  of  Christ : 
W'e  are  risen  with  Him  from  the  dead,  and  should  seek  the 
things  that  are  above,  where  our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God.  Forasmuch,  then,  as  we  are  the  children  of  the  hea- 
venly man,  we  should  exhibit  the  form  and  feature  and  power 
and  acts  of  the  heavenly  man,  of  the  Son  of  God,  of  Him  in 
whom  dwelleth  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  Now, 
His  actings  as  the  risen  man  are  entirely  and  altogether 
supernatural,  whether  you  look  at  them  in  the  inward  man  of 
the  heart  renewed  by  His  power,  or  in  the  outward  demon- 
stration which  He  is  to  make  when  He  shall  come  again  to 
destroy  the  course  of  this  present  evil  world,  to  raise  the 
dead,  to  cleanse  away  sin,  and  other  mighty  acts  to  do,  which 
are  not  within  the  laws  of  nature,  but  above  them  all.  We, 
then,  as  His  children,  begotten  from  above  into  His  heavenly 


524  THE  GIFTS  OF 

image,  ought  to  put  forth,  in  order  to  prove  our  sonship,  some 
features  of  the  supernatural,  not  only  in  the  way  of  a  holy 
will  triumphant  over  the  law  of  sin,  and  a  word  triumphant 
over  the  law  of  falsehood,  but  of  a  mighty  power  triumphing 
over  the  law  of  sickness,  infirmity,  and  death  :  in  one  word, 
we  should  put  forth  a  first-fruits  of  that  power  which  He 
Himself  will  put  forth  in  the  day  of  His  appearing.  There- 
fore it  is  that  in  our  baptism  we  have  promised  to  us,  not 
only  the  cleansing  away  of  sin, — the  remission,  the  dismissal, 
or  divorcement  of  it ;  which  being  put  away,  what  is  there  left 
but  holiness  ? — but  we  have  also  the  promise  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  given  by  the  prophet  Joel,  for  the  purpose  of  de- 
monstrating that  we  are  children  of  the  risen  Christ,  members 
of  the  glorified  and  omnipotent  Head.  Therefore  also  the 
apostles  and  disciples  were  not  permitted  to  go  and  preach 
until  they  had  received  that  heavenly  baptism.  Their  word 
must  first  be  instinct  with  heavenly  power,  before  it  can  con- 
vert men  unto  God.  So  also  it  was  with  Christ  himself:  He 
undertook  not  His  public  ministry  till  He  had  received  the 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  and  to  that  baptism  Peter  ex- 
pressly referreth  His  miraculous  power  and  doings :  "  That 
word  (I  say)  ye  know,  which  was  published  throughout  all 
Judea,  and  began  from  Galilee,  after  the  baptism  which  John 
preached  :  how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  with  power ;  who  went  about  doing  good, 
and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil ;  for  God 
was  with  him,"  (Acts  x.  37,  38.)  Then,  also,  He  began  to 
make  disciples :  then  His  word  began  to  be  spirit  and  life. 
Till  that  time  He  was  merely  the  holy  man  under  the  law ; 
the  type  and  Father,  I  take  it,  of  what  the  Jews  shall  be  when 
He  is  revealed  as  their  King,  and  they  as  His  willing  people ; 
from  that  time  forth  He  became  the  holy  man  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  putting  forth  the  first-fruits  of  His  celestial 
glory.  And  we,  being  baptized  with  the  same  Holy  Ghost, 
are  required  in  this  life  to  put  forth  the  same  first-fruits  of 
our  celestial  glory ;  and  our  words,  like  His  words — being  in 
truth  His  in  us — should  be  spirit  and  life.  This,  now,  is  the 
answer  to  the  question.  How  are  these  signs  and  wonders 
connected  with  the  relationship  of  children  ?     The  answer  is. 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  525 

Because  the  child  is  like  his  Father,  and  puts  forth  a  first- 
fruits  of  his  Father's  power. 

The  second  question  arising  out  of  this  passage  is,  For 
what  use  were  He  and  His  children  to  be  gifted  with  these 
supernatural  powers  ?  This  is  the  chief  question  which  we 
have  taken  upon  us  to  examine ;  and  I  think  we  have  full 
satisfaction  upon  it  in  the  passage  and  its  commentary.  It 
is  said,  that  they  were  to  be  "  for  signs  and  wonders  in  Israel 
from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  dwelleth  in  mount  Zion ;"  and 
it  is  immediately  added,  "  And  when  they  shall  say  unto  you. 
Seek  unto  them  that  have  familiar  spirits,  and  unto  wizards 
that  peep  and  that  mutter ;  should  not  a  people  seek  unto 
their  God.-*  for  the  living  to  the  dead  .-'"  (Isa.  viii.  19.)  In 
these  words  are  contained  another  use  of  signs  and  wonders, 
to  be  for  the  distinguishing  of  the  servants  of  God  from  the 
servants  of  the  evil  one.  There  were  some  who  would  have 
sent  the  people  to  those  who  have  familiar  spirits,  and  unto 
wizards  who  peep  and  mutter :  God,  to  deliver  the  people 
out  of  the  hands  of  such  necromancy  and  devil-worship,  doth 
send  forth  His  witnesses,  endowed  with  His  own  gifts  of 
supernatural  power,  that  the  people  might  seek  unto  them, 
and  receive  the  law  and  the  testimony  from  their  mouth. 
Isaiah's  prophecy  had  in  view,  not  only  the  distant  event  of 
Immanuel's  coming,  but  also  the  near  event  of  Israel's  rejec- 
tion from  her  inheritance  ;  and  therefore  he  nameth  the  forms 
of  idolatry  which  prevailed  in  those  times,  of  which  the  par- 
ticulars are  given  in  2  Kings  xviii.  16,  17.  The  form,  indeed, 
was  changed  in  our  Lord's  time ;  but  it  was  not  the  less 
opposed  to  the  truth,  standing  in  traditions,  severities,  and 
observances,  which  "  made  void  the  law  and  testimony  of 
God."  From  these  opposers  of  the  truth  to  distinguish 
Christ  and  His  disciples,  they  were  endowed  with  the  gift  of 
tongues,  to  discourse  openly  with  all,  and  so  put  to  shame 
the  peepings  and  mutterings  of  the  wizards  ;  with  prophesy- 
ings,  to  bring  to  naught  the  divinations  of  the  enchanters ; 
and  with  discernment  of  spirits,  to  cast  the  demons  out  by 
means  of  which  the  people  were  deceived  ;  with  healing  of 
diseases,  to  make  void  the  pretensions  of  their  fabulous 
shrines.     Now,  it  is  manifest  from  the  text,  that  these  holy 


526  THE  GIFTS  OF 

witnesses  of  the  law  and  the  testimony  of  God  were  thus 
miraculously  gifted  and  sent  forth,  as  another  resource  of 
mercy  for  preserving  the  poor,  blinded,  and  deceived  people 
from  their  own  destruction,  and  delivering  them  out  of  the 
hands  of  their  blind  guides.  In  like  contrast  with  the  scribes 
and  pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law,  doth  Christ  set  the 
prophets  and  apostles  whom  He  was  about  to  endow  from 
on  high ;  and  for  the  same  end,  of  endeavouring  to  reclaim 
the  wicked  people.  After  having  pronounced  manifold  woes 
upon  the  false  teachers  and  perverters  of  the  people,  He  thus 
expresseth  the  same  thing  with  our  prophet :  "  Wherefore, 
behold,  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  and  wise  men,  and  scribes  ; 
and  some  of  them  ye  shall  kill  and  crucify;  and  some  of 
them  shall  ye  scourge  in  your  synagogues,  and  persecute 
them  from  city  to  city,"  (Matt,  xxiii.  34.)  In  the  Gospel  by 
Luke,  apostles  also  are  mentioned  ;  and  it  is  introduced  by 
these  words,  "  Wherefore  also  said  the  wisdom  of  God."  I 
know  not  whether  this  be  a  name  of  Christ,  or  intended  as  a 
loose  reference  to  some  of  the  prophets  :  if  the  latter,  I  should 
think  it  is  to  this  very  passage  of  Isaiah  the  reference  is 
made,  "  signs  and  wonders  "  being  the  endowments  of  those 
who  filled  the  prophetical  and  apostolical  offices.  Be  this  as 
it  may,  the  passage  shews,  that,  though  the  effort  which 
Christ  made  in  person  had  failed,  there  was  another  still  to 
be  made  for  reclaiming  the  Jewish  people,  by  endowing  those 
their  children  and  brethren  with  the  same  powers,  and  send- 
ing them  forth  over  the  cities  of  Israel.  And  if  we  now  turn 
to  the  commentary  of  the  apostle  in  the  2d  of  the  Hebrews, 
we  shall  find  this  idea  confirmed.  Having  shewn  Christ's 
superiority  in  all  respects  to  the  angels,  he  requires  of  the 
Hebrews  to  give  more  earnest  heed  to  His  word  than  even 
their  fathers  had  done  to  the  word  spoken  by  angels  through 
the  mediation  of  Moses  :  "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect 
so  great  salvation  ;  which  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by 
the  Lord,  and  was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that  heard 
him ;  God  also  bearing  them  witness,  both  with  signs  and 
wonders,  and  with  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  according  to  his  own  will.'"'  (Heb.  ii.  3,4.)  In  this 
passage  the  use  of  these  miraculous  endowments  is,  as  in  the 


THE  HOL  V  GHOS  T.  527 

prophet,  made  to  be  for  confirmation  of  the  word  which  they 
spake ;  being  God's  witness  in  them,  God's  manifesting  Him- 
self to  be  working  in  them.  Then  he  connects  this  with 
"  the  world  to  come,"  of  which  Christ  is  the  ordained  Lord, 
(ver.  5-10,)  whence,  in  chap.  v.  5,  they  are  called  "the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come,"  being  the  same  with  "  the 
earnest  of  the  inheritance"  of  Eph.  i.  13,  and  "the  first-fruits 
of  the  Spirit "  of  Rom.  viii.  23.  After  this,  Paul,  having  shewn 
the  causes  of  Christ's  humiliation,  and  made  the  quotation 
from  our  prophet,  and  shewn  how  Christ  works  in  us  what 
first  He  completed  in  Himself,  he  proceeds  in  the  3d  chapter 
to  treat  of  Him  as  the  builder-up  of  a  house  unto  God  ; 
"  which  house,"  saith  he,  "  are  ye,  if  ye  hold  fast  the  con- 
fidence and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  steadfast  unto  the  end." 
From  the  examination  of  this  passage  of  Isaiah,  along  with 
the  several  comments  upon  it  given  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
the  New  Testament,  we  ascertain  two  things  further  with 
respect  to  the  end  of  these  miraculous  endowments.  The 
first,  that  God  would  not  cast  off  the  Jewish  people  into  their 
long  abasement  and  misery,  until  He  had  given  them  a 
ministry  confirmed  by  supernatural  witness.  To  have  rejected 
Messiah  was  not  enough ;  they  must  also  reject  Messiah's 
children,  set  up  amongst  them  "  for  signs  and  wonders." 
God  must  put  His  difference  upon  those  who  give  heed  to 
His  Son,  and  those  who  give  heed  to  others  than  He ;  upon 
the  one  bestowing  His  own  seal  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  upon  the 
others  bringing  confusion  and  darkness  and  misery.  For  it 
is  a  thing  well  recorded,  and  confessed  even  by  the  heathen 
themselves,  that  from  thenceforward  their  oracles  became 
dumb,  and  their  deities  or  demons  impotent.  Now  if  God 
did  thus,  by  raising  up  and  sending  forth  a  body  of  witnesses, 
testify  to  the  Jewish  people  that  Jesus  was  indeed  the  Christ, 
before  casting  them  out ;  will  He  not  do  the  same  by  the 
Gentiles  also,  amongst  whom  He  sendeth  His  witnesses  when 
the  Jews  rejected  them :  "  If  you  refuse  to  hear  us,  we  turn  to 
the  Gentiles .'' "  God  taught  Peter  both  by  word  and  sign,  that 
He  was  no  respecter  of  persons,  "  but  in  every  nation  he  that 
feareth  Him  and  worketh  righteousness  is  accepted  of  Him." 
God  in  His  dealings  with  the  Jews  was  not  partial,  nor  more 


528  THE  GIFTS  OF 

favourable  than  He  is  to  any  other  nation.  By  them  He  did 
reveal  His  tender  mercy  and  long-suffering  unto  all.  If,  then, 
His  principle  of  treating  mankind  be  one  and  the  same,  and 
He  did  see  it  good  to  furnish  His  witnesses  to  the  Jews  Avith 
these  signs  and  wonders,  He  will  see  it  necessary  to  do  the 
same  by  His  witnesses  to  other  nations :  what  should  intro- 
duce a  difference .-'  It  was  not  enough  for  His  mercy  and 
goodness,  that  Christ's  disciples  should  have  the  law  and 
the  testimony  ;  they  must  also  have  signs  and  wonders,  with 
which  to  make  it  apparent  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ :  why 
should  it  be  necessary  that  to  another  nation  less  should  be 
given  ?  The  prophet  Isaiah  is  shewing  what  controversy  and 
argument  God  would  maintain  with  a  nation  for  the  testimony 
of  Christ ;  and  he  asserts  it  to  be  twofold, — the  internal  testi- 
mony of  truth  and  holiness,  and  the  external  testimony  of 
signs  and  wonders.  Those  who,  sending  missionaries  into 
foreign  lands,  will  assert  less  to  be  necessary  now,  must  find 
their  warrant  for  it  somewhere  else  than  here,  where  there  is 
a  distinct  contradiction  of  it.  Not  less,  but  more,  seems  to  be 
necessary  with  a  heathen  nation  :  for  the  Jews  had  already 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  and  believed  them  ;  whereas  the 
heathen  have  neither  knowledge  nor  belief  of  the  Word  of 
God,  but  are  preoccupied  in  general  with  the  false  writings  of 
men.  The  Jew  is  a  parallel  case  with  ours.  They  had  the 
Scriptures,  and  believed  them  ;  we  have  the  Scriptures,  and 
believe  them.  But  because  they  had  the  Word,  did  God  say 
they  shall  not  have  the  miracle }  Quite  the  contrary  :  He 
says,  they  shall  have  the  miracle  also.  But  ye  say,  because 
we  have  the  Word  we  shall  not  have  the  miracle.  Where 
learned  you  to  say  so  }  And,  in  point  of  fact,  how  was  it 
with  the  Gentiles .''  Was  not  the  Corinthian  church  as  full 
of  signs  as  the  church  of  Jerusalem .''  But  we  must  forbear 
from  teaching,  and  keep  to  our  work  of  learning  from  the 
oracles  of  God. 

The  second  end  which  we  here  discover  for  these  gifts  being 
in  the  Church,  is,  that  they  might  serve  as  God's  own  witness 
to  the  words  which  the  ministers  of  His  Son  declare.  And 
this  same  end  doth  Peter  assign  for  Christ's  own  miracles  in 
the   loth  chapter  of  the  Acts,  ver.   38,  already  referred  to. 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  529 

Christ  himself  also  appeals  both  to  His  words  and  His  works, 
as  being  spoken  and  done  by  the  Father  dwelling  within 
Him.  That  indwelling  of  the  Father  was  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  is  therefore  called  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  ;  whom  also 
He  promised  to  His  disciples,  and  sent  down  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  Christ  in  His  own  person  of  the  Son  sustaineth 
the  personality  of  the  Son  of  man  ;  the  person  of  the  Father 
is  in  Him  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  also  Christ  by  regenera- 
tion becomes  in  His  own  personality  the  upholder  of  our 
persons — we  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ ; — but  it  is  the  Holy 
Ghost  which  brings  us  the  Spirit  of  the  Father.  The  human 
in  the  saints  is  of  Christ,  the  superhuman  is  of  the  Father ; 
both  inwrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  acting  in  the  former 
work  as  the  regenerating  Spirit  of  Christ,  in  the  latter  as  the 
baptizing  Spirit  of  the  Father  :  and  so  Christ  and  the  Father 
Jiave  their  meeting  place  in  the  soul  of  the  saint,  in  whom  the 
Holy  Ghost  testifieth  both  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  And 
thus  it  is  that  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  is  the  Church  glorified, 
hath  for  its  light  the  concentration  of  two  Lights,  the  "  Lord 
God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb,"  and  them  also  for  its  temple : 
they  meet  and  rejoice  together  in  the  Church.  This  being 
understood,  we  are  able  to  comprehend  the  nature  of  the 
witness  which  the  superhuman  endowments  brought  to  the 
word  of  Christ  and  His  disciples.  They  were  the  testimony 
of  God  in  them,  of  God  in  their  word,  of  God  in  their  act :  as 
it  is  written  :  "  For  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of 
your  Father  which  speaketh  in  you,"  (Matt.  xi.  20.)  And 
again  :  "  The  Father  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth  the  works  ; 
....  believe  me  for  the  very  works'  sake.  Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  you,  He  that  believeth  on  me,  the  works  that  I  do 
shall  he  do  also ;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do, 
because  I  go  to  the  Father,"  (John  xiv.)  And  again  :  "  And 
there  are  diversities  of  operations  [in-workings,  energisings,] 
but  it  is  the  same  God  which  worketh  all  in  all,"  [all  the  gifts 
in  all  the  gifted  persons,]  (i  Cor.  xii.  6.)  These  passages  are 
the  best  exposition  of  that  to  which  our  attention  is  more 
immediately  drawn  on  this  head ;  "  God  also  bearing  them 
witness  [witnessing  with,  upon  ;  that  is,  upon  their  word,]  both 
with  signs  and  wonders,  and  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  [powers 
VOL.  V.  2  L 


530  THE  GIFTS  OF 

and  distributions]  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  (Heb.  ii.  4 ;)  which  is 
parallel  with  that  prayer  in  the  Acts,  "  Grant  unto  thy  ser- 
vants, that  with  all  boldness  they  may  speak  thy  word,  by 
stretching  out  thine  hand  to  heal,  and  that  mighty  signs  and 
wonders  may  be  done  by  the  name  of  thy  holy  Child  Jesus." 
The  testimony  of  God  stood  in  the  powers  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  they  had  ability  to  exert ;  and  these  powers  were  such 
as  to  avouch  a  present  God,  an  indwelling  God.  This  demon- 
stration stood  not  in  the  power  alone,  but  in  the  goodness 
and  mercy  of  the  works.  Power  superhuman  alone  doth  not 
avouch  God,  but  merely  an  agent  of  some  kind  stronger  than 
man ;  which  might  be,  and  oft  was,  Beelzebub  and  his  sub- 
ject demons — whose  power  to  do  miracles  hath  been  mani- 
fested from  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  magicians ;  and  it  is 
prophesied  shall  be  most  wonderfully  manifested  in  the  time 
immediately  preceding  the  coming  of  the  Lord  :  "  For  there 
shall  arise  false  Christs,  and  false  prophets,  and  shall  shew 
great  signs  and  wonders ;  insomuch  that,  if  it  were  possible, 
they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect,"  (Matt.  xxiv.  24.)  So  also  is  it 
written  in  the  Apocalypse,  (chap.  xiii.  13,  14.)  And  our  Lord, 
when  charged  with  doing  His  works  by  means  of  Beelzebub, 
did  answer  two  ways  ;  neither  of  which  sanction  the  common 
notion  that  Beelzebub  could  not,  that  none  but  God  could, 
perform  a  miracle :  this  He  never  hints  at,  but  takes  quite 
other  ground,  saying,  "  A  kingdom  divided  against  itself  can- 
not stand;"  and,  "  By  whom  do  your  children  cast  them  out.-*" 
The  first  of  these  answers  appeals  to  the  moral  character  of 
His  works,  that  they  were  all  against  Beelzebub,  being  works 
of  goodness  and  mercy,  and  redemption  from  evil ;  that  they 
were  manifestly  acts  against  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  and,  con- 
sequently, for  the  kingdom  of  God.  Now  this  answer  takes 
for  granted  a  moral  sense  in  man,  capable  of  discerning  be- 
tween good  and  evil,  between  a  work  of  God  and  a  work  of 
the  devil ;  to  which  our  Lord  appeals  the  question  of  His 
miracles,  and  not  to  the  degree  or  amount  of  power  mani- 
fested in  the  work.  To  the  conscience  of  man,  which  can 
discern  God's  way  from  the  devil's  way ;  not  to  the  sense  of 
man,  which  cannot  measure  the  amount  of  power  possessed 
by  the  evil  spirit,  doth  He  make  His  appeal.     The  second 


THE  HOL  Y  GHOST.  531 

answer  contains  an  argument  to  set  them  free  from  their 
malice  :  If  you  think  thus  evil  of  me,  will  you  think  the  same 
evil  of  your  children,  who  with  me  are  labouring  in  the  same 
work  ;  but  if  to  them  you  attribute  no  such  league  with  Beel- 
zebub, why  then  to  me  ? 

There  can  be  no  doubt,  then,  from  this,  that  it  is  a  very 
short  and  limited,  yea,  and  erroneous,  view  of  the  evidence  of 
miracles  which  is  now  satisfying  the  churches  ;  who  think  that 
every  superhuman  work  is  necessarily  of  God,  and  doth  attest 
the  vorker  of  it  to  be  a  man  of  God,  whom  we  are  bound  to 
hear  as  God  himself  If  this  were  true,  why  is  it  that,  when 
the  ciurches  are  so  often  told  to  try  the  spirits,  not  the  work- 
ing cf  miracles,  but  the  doctrines  taught,  are  given  as  the 
tests?  This  wide-spread  error,  I  perceive,  will  be  a  great 
means  of  laying  the  Church  open  to  those  great  signs  and 
wonders  which  the  false  Christs  and  false  prophets,  prophesied 
to  ippear  in  the  time  of  the  end,  shall  work.  The  witness  of 
God,  with  the  word  of  Christ,  standeth  in  a  certain  description 
of  minculous  works,  and  not  in  miraculous  works  in  general ; 
gospel  vorks,  the  counterpart  of  gospel  words ;  and  therefore 
proving  that  it  is  one  and  the  same  God  who  doth  the  one 
and  spealeth  the  other.  Of  what  kind  these  are  we  learn  from 
the  catalojoies  of  theni  in  the  New  Testament  so  frequently 
referred  to.  These  works  speak  God  to  be  in  the  person,  and 
in  the  body  ^f  persons,  who  do  them.  None  but  the  members 
of  Christ's  b)dy  can  do  works  of  that  kind ;  none  but  the 
redeemed  senants  of  the  Redeemer  can  work  these  redemp- 
tion-works ;  e\ery  one  of  which  is  the  taking  off  some  curse 
which  sin  hath'mposed,  and  from  which  only  the  Redeemer 
from  sin  can  deiver.  Christ  pays  the  price  of  the  redemption  ; 
God  takes  off  th  bonds,  and  sets  the  prisoner  free.  A  work 
which  will  testify  of  God,  must  be  of  such  a  kind  as  acknow- 
ledgeth  Christ  tobe  the  Redeemer  from  sin,  by  actually  free- 
ing some  person  lom  some  of  the  bondages  of  sin.  It  was 
in  this  way  Christspoke  when  He  healed,  saying,  "  Thy  sins 
be  forgiven  thee  ;""Go,  and  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing 
befall  thee;"  "  Ou;ht  not  this  woman,  being  a  daughter  of 
Abraham,  whom  Stan  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen  years, 
be  loosed  from  this  bnd  V    As  the  Redeemer  from  all  bonds 


532  THE  GIFTS  OF 

of  Satan,  and  especially  from   disease  and  death,  is  Christ 
preached  by  us ;  as  such  is  He  to  be  manifested  by  God  in  the 
world  to  come ;  of  which  manifestation  God  gives,  in  all  these 
signs  and  wonders  and  divers  powers  and  distributions  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  a  token  and  a  part ;  thereby  testifying,  that 
Christ  is  He  unto  whom  He  hath  given  the  fulness  and  com- 
pleteness of  that  glorious  work.     Unless  men,  therefore,  be 
left  so  far  to  themselves  as  to  say,  that  God  hath  ceased  to 
testify  to  the  work  which  Christ  performed  in  the  flesh — of 
casting  Satan  out ;  of  redeeming  all  flesh  from  death,  and 
disease  its  precursor ;  of  restoring  the  animal  and  vegetable 
world,  and  all  creation,  to  their  original  sinlessness,  innocency, 
and  subserviency  to  mankind ; — unless  men  be  disposed  to 
say,  that  they  know  God  hath  ceased  to  be  at  any  pains  or 
charges,  in  giving  testimony  to  this  work  of  His  Son,  they  have 
no  ground  for  believing  that  the  age  of  miracles  is  past :  ahd 
if  they  say,  they  know  the  mind  of  God  to  have  changedlin 
this  matter,  we  ask  them  for  the  source  of  their  knowledge  ; 
and  till  they  produce  this,  we  must  look  upon  them  /s  un- 
faithful witnesses  of  God  and  of  Christ,  fraudulent  messengers 
between  them  and  the  world.     As  to  the  fact  whch  they 
allege,  that  there  have  not  of  a  long  time  been  any  sich  seals  ; 
granting  their  allegation  to  be  a  truth,  which  I  do  lOt  believe, 
the  answer  to  it  is,  that  there  hath  been  no  testint)ny  to  the 
great  work  of  Christ's  redemption  such  as  to  \k  worthy  of 
being  so  sealed  unto.     We  do  not  look  for  these^vorks  to  be 
wrought  in  China,  because  there  is  no  testimorf  there  to  be 
confirmed  by  them  ;  nor  in  the  Protestant  Cl/irch,  if  so  be 
that  testimony  hath  ceased.     Now  I  frankly  svow  my  belief, 
that  there  hath  been  no  preaching  of  the  ^surrection  and 
redemption  of  the  flesh,  and  of  the  world,  ii  the  Protestant 
Churches,  within  my  memory ;  and  a  very  tpor  testimony  of 
the  redemption  of  the  soul  from  sin — an  A^inian,  Pelagian, 
or  particular-redemption  doctrine,  and  not  /Christian  one ; — 
preaching  for  the  honours  of  a  system,  of  ^rticles,  or  of  con- 
fessions, more  than  for  the  honour  of  C^'ist :   certainly  no 
preaching  of  Christ  glorified,  possessed  c;  the  Seven  Spirits 
of  God;  of  Christ  to  come  and  redeem /lie  world  from  the 
usurpation  of  wickedness  ;  of  Christ  to  ome  and  raise  all  the 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  533 

dead,  to  glorify  His  Church,  and  to  cast  the  wicked  into  hell. 
These  are  the  realities  of  Christ's  consummate  work,  which, 
being  preached,  God  seals  with  a  first-fruits  of  the  very  thing 
declared  ;  but  these  have  no  more,  in  an  open  manner,  been 
declared  in  this  island,  or,  I  may  say,  in  Christendom,  since 
the  first  three  centuries,  than  in  regions  which  the  gospel  hath 
not  visited  ;  and  so  there  has  been  nothing  to  seal  to.  The 
seal  to  the  preaching  of  this  time,  is  a  good  living,  a  good 
name  with  the  world,  a  reputation  for  learning  and  eloquence. 
"  Verily  it  hath  its  reward."  But  as  the  liberty  of  preaching 
shall  awaken,  and  the  full  voice  of  its  glory  be  heard,  its  true 
seal  will  be  given,  which  is  from  men,  casting  out  of  the 
synagogue,  persecution,  and  death ;  from  God,  "  the  doing 
among  them  the  works  which  none  other  man  did."  "  And 
all  this  will  they  do  unto  you,  because  they  know  not  the 
Father,  nor"  Christ.  If  they  knew  the  Father,  they  would 
know  the  Father's  works,  and  love  the  manifestation  of  them, 
and  desire  it :  if  they  knew  Christ,  they  would  speak  of  His 
glory,  and  desire  His  appearing. 

The  subject  of  the  gifts  commonly  called  extraordinary, 
and  rashly  conceived  of  as  given  for  a  local  and  temporary 
end,  is  one  of  far  greater  importance  than  the  advocates  of 
either  opinion  have  dared  to  conceive,  or,  at  least,  have 
ventured  to  express  ;  being,  as  I  judge,  connected  in  the 
closest  manner  with  the  edification  of  the  Church  in  love  and 
holiness ;  with  her  witness  among  the  nations  for  their  con- 
version unto  Christ ;  with  the  glory  of  God,  as  the  Creator  of 
the  human  soul  for  His  shrine,  agent,  and  interpreter;  with 
the  glory  of  Christ,  as  the  Head  of  the  Church,  subordinating 
all  the  members  to  Himself  for  the  use  of  the  Creator; 
with  the  glory  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  very  life  and  mind 
and  substance  of  Godhead,  inhabiting,  informing,  and  mani- 
festing forth  the  being  of  God,  in  such  wise  as  that  the 
Church  should  be  God's  manifested  fulness,  the  fulness  of 
God,  who  filleth  all  in  all.  Such  a  subject  to  have  under- 
taken would  even  now  appal  me,  had  I  to  work  out  the  form, 
or  to  weave  the  web  of  it,  from  my  own  reason  :  but,  having 
expressly  given  myself  up  to  the  guidance  of  God's  own 


534  THE  GIFTS  OF 

word,  ill  that  order  in  which  it  hath  pleased  Him  to  reveal 
the  same,  I  feel  nowise  embarrassed  ;  but,  following  the 
footsteps  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Old  Testament,  with 
the  candle  of  the  New  Testament  in  my  hand,  I  feel  that 
I  cannot  go  far  astray.  And  if  I  should  err  in  my  inter- 
pretations, the  error  carries  its  own  correction  along  with  it ; 
for  at  every  turn  I  appeal  to  the  written  word  of  God, 
"written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through  patience  and  com- 
fort of  the  Scriptures  might  have  hope."  And  the  more  easily 
to  fall  into  the  method  of  God,  I  have  chosen  to  adopt  no 
method  of  my  own,  but  simply  to  follow  down  in  order  the 
scriptural  testimonies  which  are  found  upon  this  subject. 
Of  these,  two — those  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  and  Isa.  viii. — have  already 
been  taken  into  consideration  ;  and  I  now  proceed  to  that 
written  in  the  28th  chapter  of  the  same  prophet,  and  ap- 
plied to  the  gift  of  tongues  in  the  14th  chapter  of  the  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians. 

The  words  which  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  mouth  of  the 
apostle  Paul,  hath  set  his  seal  to,  as  a  prophecy  of  the  gift 
of  tongues,  are  as  follows :  "  For  with  stammering  lips  and 
another  tongue  will  he  speak  to  this  people;  to  whom  he 
said.  This  is  the  rest  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the  weary  to 
rest,  and  this  is  the  refreshing  :  yet  they  would  not  hear." 
And  the  manner  of  His  doing  so  is  this :  "  In  the  law  it  is 
written.  With  men  of  other  tongues  and  other  lips  will  I 
speak  unto  this  people ;  and  yet  for  all  that  they  will  not 
hear  me,  saith  the  Lord.  Wherefore  tongues  are  for  a  sign, 
not  to  them  that  believe,  but  to  them  that  believe  not :  but 
prophesying  serveth  not  for  them  that  believe  not,  but  for 
them  which  believe."  Nothing  therefore  can  be  more  dis- 
tinct, than  that  the  Lord  would  have  us  to  study  the  pro- 
phecy of  the  28th  chapter  of  Isaiah  by  the  light  of  the  14th 
chapter  of  First  Corinthians,  if  we  would  get  insight  into  the 
mystery  of  the  gift  of  tongues,  which  is  nowhere  else  in  the 
Old  Testament  individually  referred  to. 

The  prophecy  begins  by  denouncing  woe  upon  the  drunkards 
of  Ephraim,  or  the  Ten  Tribes,  represented  in  that  tribe  which 
had  the  birthright,  and  spread  over  the  region  of  Galilee  and 
Samaria,  where  was  the  first  scene  of  our  Lord's  labours,  as  had 


THE  HOL  V  GHOST.  535 

been  prophesied  by  Isaiah,  (chap.  ix.  i.)  Of  these  drunkards, 
the  utter  desolation  is  foretold  by  "  a  mighty  and  strong  one, 
which  as  a  tempest  of  hail  and  a  destroying  storm,  as  a  flood 
of  mighty  waters  overflowing,  shall  cast  down  to  the  earth 
with  the  hand,"  (Isa.  xxviii.  2.)  By  the  Assyrian  out  of  the 
north  this  began'  to  be  accomplished  upon  the  same  generation 
whom  our  prophet  rebuked  ;  was  consummated  upon  the 
generation  to  whom  our  Lord  addressed  the  direful  woes  of 
Capernaum,  Chorazin,  and  Bethsaida;  and  still  continues,  both 
upon  the  land  and  upon  the  people.  Then,  after  the  usual 
consolation  to  the  residue,  and  promise  of  a  most  glorious 
restitution  of  all  the  things  which  in  wrath  and  judgment  were 
to  be  trodden  down  for  a  season,  the  scope  of  the  prophecy 
passeth  over,  at  vcr.  7,  to  the  priests  and  the  prophets,  the 
consecrated  guardians  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  the 
land  ;  upon  whom  the  burden  proceedeth  until  the  14th  verse, 
when  it  passeth  over  to  the  political  or  regal  estate ;  and  con- 
cludes with  a  parable,  taken  from  the  art  of  the  husbandman 
(ver.  23.)  Of  these  three  portions  of  the  prophecy,  it  is  the 
middle  one  with  which  we  have  to  do  ;  and  this  consisteth  of 
two  parts  :  the  former  descriptive  of  the  blindness  of  mind, 
the  ignorance,  error,  and  uncleanness  of  spirit,  which  had  come 
over  the  learned,  studious,  and  sacred  classes  of  the  people  ; 
namely,  the  priests,  the  scribes,  and  the  doctors  ;  whose  state 
is  figuratively  set  forth  in  these  words  :  "  But  they  also  have 
erred  through  wine,  and  through  strong  drink  are  out  of  the 
way :  the  priest  and  the  prophet  have  erred  through  strong 
drink,  they  are  swallowed  up  of  wine,  they  are  out  of  the  way 
through  strong  drink ;  they  err  in  vision,  they  stumble  in 
judgment.  For  all  tables  are  full  of  vomit  and  filthiness,  so 
that  there  is  no  place  clean,"  (ver.  7,  8.)  This  is  not  the 
drunkenness  and  debauchery  of  the  flesh — for  in  the  time  of 
our  Lord,  who  made  great  use  of  this  prophecy,  these  classes 
were  mostly  of  the  Pharisees,  a  self-denying  sect,  and  severe 
as  to  the  letter  of  religion  and  morals — but  it  is  that  incapa- 
city of  understanding  anything  aright  which  comes  from  a 
perverted  and  dishonest  mind,  intent  not  upon  God's  glory 
and  the  conscience  of  truth,  but  neglecting  these  altogether, 
for  sinful  ends  of  ambition  and  vain-glory,  or  mingling  them 


536  THE  GIFTS  OF 

with  the  interests  of  a  sect  with  which  we  identify  ourselves. 
Such,  for  example,  as  are  to  be  found  this  day  among  the 
zealous  promoters  of  the  Evangelical  sect ;  which,  in  respect 
of  its  love  of  party  and  incapacity  of  receiving  truth,  is  the 
very  facsimile  of  the  religious  and  believing  class  to  whom 
these  words  were  addressed :  "  Stay  yourselves,  and  wonder  ; 
cry  ye  out,  and  cry:  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with  wine; 
they  stagger,  but  not  with  strong  drink.  For  the  Lord  hath 
poured  out  upon  you  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep,  and  hath  closed 
your  eyes  :  the  prophets  and  your  rulers,  the  seers,  hath  he 
covered,"  (Isa.  xxix.  9,  10.)  The  perfect  identity  of  the 
Evangelical  sect  with  these  drunkards  of  Ephraim  is  shewn  in 
nothing  more  than  this,  that  if  any  person  there  abiding  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  any  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  he  is  fain  to 
come  out  from  among  them  ;  and  if  he  will  not,  they  will  move 
heaven  and  earth  to  cast  him  out.  The  latter  part  of  the 
prophecy  is  the  judgment  of  these  men,  consisting  in  making 
a  void  of  the  way  of  wisdom,  and  adopting  a  new  way  in  its 
stead  ;  which  is,  the  foolishness  of  preaching ;  rejecting  the 
way  of  the  wise  and  the  prudent,  of  the  scribe  and  the  dis- 
puter  of  this  world  ;  and  adopting  in  its  stead  the  way  of 
babes.  "  Whom  shall  he  teach  knowledge  }  and  whom  shall 
he  make  to  understand  doctrine .''  Them  that  are  weaned 
from  the  milk,  and  drawn  from  the  breasts.  For  precept  must 
be  upon  precept,  precept  upon  precept ;  line  upon  line,  line 
upon  line ;  here  a  little,  and  there  a  little  :  for  with  stammer- 
ing lips  and  another  tongue  will  he  speak  to  this  people," 
(Isa.  xxviii.  9-1 1.)  They  would  not  take  the  gift  of  God  for 
its  own  preciousness,  or  for  the  dignity  and  excellency  of  the 
Giver ;  but  must  have  it  set  out  with  the  arts  of  the  sophist, 
or  in  the  forms  of  traditionary  learning.  God  said  to  them, 
"  This  is  the  rest  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the  weary  to  rest ; 
and  this  is  the  refreshing  :  yet  they  would  not  hear.  But  the 
word  of  the  Lord  was  unto  them  precept  upon  precept,  pre- 
cept upon  precept ;  line  upon  line,  line  upon  line  ;  here  a  little, 
and  there  a  little  ;  that  they  might  go,  and  fall  backward,  and 
be  broken,  and  snared,  and  taken,"  (ver.  12,  13.)  They  would 
accept  of  no  heavenly  boon  which  would  not  defer  to  their 
notions  of  manly  wi.sdom ;  and  God  would  not  give  it  in  any 


THE  HOL  Y  GHOST.  $37 

other  form  than  what  is  proper  to  us  as  children.  They  stood 
upon  their  attainments ;  God  stood  upon  their  fooHshness : 
they  would  not  give  way  to  God,  and  so  they  lost  the  boon  of 
rest  and  refreshment  ;  and  were  cast  into  a  restless  bed,  to 
pass  a  long  and  dreary  night:  "  For  the  bed  is  shorter  than 
that  a  man  can  stretch  himself  on  it ;  and  the  covering  nar- 
rower than  that  he  can  wrap  himself  in  it,"  (ver.  20.) 

I.  Such  is  the  prophecy  as  a  whole ;  and  now  I  proceed  to 
point  out  the  use  of  it  made  in  general  by  the  Lord,  and  in 
particular  by  the  great  teacher  of  the  Gentiles.  The  nth 
chapter  of  St  Matthew  is  nothing  more  than  a  running  com- 
mentary upon  it  ;  where  the  Lord,  after  denouncing  woe  upon 
the  cities  of  Ephraim,  (the  ten  tribes,)  (ver.  20-24,)  for  their  un- 
belief of  His  discourses  and  miracles,  doth  receive  (Luke  vii. 
17-21)  the  account  from  His  unlearned  disciples,  the  seventy, 
how  wonderfully  they,  who  were  but  babes,  had  prospered  ; 
and  instantly  He  beheld  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  and 
rejoiceth  "  that  those  things  were  hidden  from  the  wise  and 
prudent,  and  revealed  unto  babes."  And  then  He  preaches 
the  rest  and  the  refreshment  to  the  weary,  "  Come  unto  me," 
&c.  The  apostle  Paul  also,  in  the  outset  both  of  the  Epistles 
to  the  Romans  and  to  the  Corinthians,  doth  shew  that  misuse 
of  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  heathen  which  had  led  to  the 
rejection  of  that  method  for  the  innovation  of  preaching :  and 
especially  in  the  latter  of  these  Epistles,  which  chiefly  con- 
cerneth  our  subject,  is  he  at  great  pains  to  shew  the  Corinthian 
Church  how  studiously  he  had  refrained  from  the  wisdom  of 
words,  giving  it  forth  as  a  grand  revolution  which  God  had 
introduced  into  the  world  in  the  matter  of  teaching,  for  the 
end  of  making  void  the  pride  of  human  learning  and  natural 
understanding.  And  in  confirmation  of  this,  as  an  ancient 
purpose  of  the  Father,  he  referreth  to  a  passage  in  the  next 
chapter  of  Isaiah,  which  is  but  a  continuation  and  enlargement 
of  the  passage  before  us,  (i  Cor.  i.  19.)  At  the  same  time  he 
asserteth  for  the  Church  an  higher  wisdom,  "wisdom  from 
God,"  (i  Cor.  i.  30  ;)  which  cometh  through  revelation  of  the 
Spirit  and  in  no  other  way,  (i  Cor.  \\.passini) :  and  accordingly 
the  first  two  manifestations  of  the  Spirit  are  "  the  word  of 
wisdom,  and  the  word  of  knowledge,"  (i  Cor.  xii.  8.)     It  ap- 


538  THE  GIFTS  OF 

pears,  therefore,  that  the  words  drawn  out  of  this  prophecy 
and  applied  by  the  apostle  to  the  gift  of  tongues,  are  part  of 
a  dispensation  of  judgment  upon  the  pride  of  intellect  and 
the  glory  of  learning,  which  cannot  find  out  God,  but  are  ever 
worshipping  idols  of  their  own  invention  and  imagination: 
wherefore  God,  after  long  probation  taken,  both  among  the 
Jews  and  Gentles,  did  introduce  the  method  of  babes,  "  of 
those  who  are  weaned  from  the  milk  and  drawn  from  the 
breast."  The  gospel  ever  saith,  "  Put  away  your  natural 
gifts  and  acquirements,  and  become  as  little  children,  in  order 
to  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;"  and  it  further  said,  "The 
natural  man  understandeth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  which  are  spiritually  discerned  :  therefore  ye  must  be 
born  again  of  the  Spirit,  and,  like  new-born  babes,  ye  must  de- 
sire the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby." 
Of  this  continuous  rebuke  and  judgment,  which  the  foolish- 
ness of  the  gospel  of  Christ  bringeth  against  the  most  noble 
attainments  of  unregenerate  and  unsanctified  reason,  the 
speaking  "with  stammering  lips  and  another  tongue"  is  a 
part,  and  a  chief  part :  and  another  part  is  the  way  of  reite- 
rating, and  reiterating  the  simplest  truths  as  nurses  do  to 
little  children,  until  they  enter  into  the  mind,  and  grow  with 
its  growth,  and  strengthen  with  its  strength.  No  one  knows 
at  present  much  about  the  gift  of  tongues,  because,  where  it 
has  been  given,  interpretation  hath  been  refused,  and  there- 
fore over  the  words  spoken  there  resteth  a  deep  veil  of  dark- 
ness ;  but  I  will  undertake  from  this  passage  to  declare  my 
conviction  that,  when  interpretation  shall  be  given,  the  words 
spoken  will  be  found  to  contain  no  more  than  the  simplest, 
most  elementary,  and  most  nutritious  truths  of  the  Spirit.  It , 
further  appears,  from  the  very  words  quoted  by  St  Paul,  at 
least  from  a  clause  in  the  heart  of  those  quoted,  that  the 
things  spoken  is  concerning  the  rest  and  refreshing.  "  To 
whom  he  said,  This  is  the  rest  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the 
weary  to  rest,  and  this  is  the  refreshing  ;  yet  they  would  not 
hear."  Now,  because  the  rest  spoken  of  in  the  prophets  is 
always  the  millennial  glory  and  kingdom — "  rest  with  us,  when 
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  " — we  gather  that  the  thing 


THE  HOL  Y  GHOST.  539 

spoken  with  a  stammering  lip,  and  with  men  of  other  tongues, 
concerneth  chiefly  the  coming  and  the  glory  of  Christ,  "  the 
rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God."  Moreover,  as 
the  stammering  lips  and  the  other  tongues  are  parts  of  the 
figure  taken  from  the  way  of  instructing  children — what  a 
nurse  adopteth  when  she  changeth  her  voice,  and  breaks 
down  her  words  to  the  simplest  forms  of  childish  apprehen- 
sion— we  judge  that  the  gift  of  tongues  is  greatly  for  the 
edification  of  the  children  of  the  Spirit ;  and  the  first  means 
adopted  of  God  for  drawing  out  their  higher  faculties  of 
knowledge,  and  wisdom,  and  love,  and  action.  And,  accord- 
ingly, we  find  it  always  to  have  been  the  gift  first  bestowed 
upon  the  baptized,  (Acts  ii.,  x.  46,  xix.  6 ;)  and  in  the  in- 
stances now  appearing  in  the  Church,  this  is  the  only  gift 
which  hath  been  given.  But  this  remark  is  by  no  means  to 
be  taken  as  if  in  disparagement  of  their  importance — for 
what  so  important  in  our  life  as  the  education  of  our  child- 
hood .'' — it  is  merely  proposed  as  a  thing  shrewdly  to  be  sus- 
pected, from  the  similitude  of  teaching  children  whereby  it 
hath  pleased  God  to  set  it  forth.  As  a  mother,  in  order  to 
draw  out  the  dormant  faculties  of  her  child,  doth  herself 
become  a  child ;  changing  her  voice,  her  utterance,  and  her 
very  words,  into  the  forms  which  may  best  please,  most 
strongly  attract,  and  edify  the  infant  mind  ;  so  is  it  here  de- 
clared that  God  will  use  those  gifted  with  tongues  as  a  means 
of  reducing  His  mighty  voice,  which  heretofore  shook  Sinai 
and  the  earth,  into  the  compass  and  dimension  of  mortal 
ears ;  that  He  may  'thereby  attract  unto  Himself  the  love 
and  confidence  of  His  little  children,  and  rear  them  up,  by 
line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept,  to  the  full  stature 
of  the  perfection  of  Christ.  As  John  was  the  voice  of  Christ 
preparing  His  way  before  Him ;  so,  it  seemeth  to  me,  that 
these  persons  speaking  with  tongues,  are  the  voice  of  the 
Spirit  seeking  access  into  our  hearts  by  our  ears,  for  the  in- 
dwelling God  to  abide  in  us,  and  act  and  speak  forth  of  us 
for  ever.  We  have  seen,  from  the  passage  in  the  68th  Psalm, 
as  interpreted  by  the  4th  chapter  of  the  Ephesians,  that  the 
Church  is  a  body  for  God's  Spirit,  for  God  himself,  to  dwell 


540  THE  GIFTS  OF 

in,  and  speak  from,  in  the  sight  and  hearing  of  all  creatures 
for  ever.  That  the  baptized  children  may  be  conscious  to 
the  Spirit  of  God  in  them.  He  speaks  forth  of  them  in  a 
tongue  unknown  ;  and  by  degrees  they  become  acquainted, 
through  the  means  of  such  inward  movings,  that  God  is  in 
them  of  a  very  truth.  The  mother's  nursing  draws  forth  the 
voice  of  the  child  into  indistinct  sounds,  then  into  syllables 
and  words,  and  finally  into  the  various  forms  of  the  discourse 
of  reason  ;  for  she  knows  that  there  is  a  latent  man  or  woman 
in  the  swathed  child,  and  she  proceeds,  as  it  will  bear  it,  to 
educate  or  lead  it  forth.  So  God,  having  baptized  any  one 
into  Christ,  and  well  knowing  that  there  is  now  in  Him  the 
child  of  Christ,  doth  proceed  by  discipline  to  rear  up  the  new- 
born babe,  by  the  means  which  He  best  knoweth,  whereof  it 
is  declared  that  speaking  with  tongues  is  one  of  the  first. 
Before  leaving  this  sweet  view  of  the  subject  I  have  two 
observations  to  make.  The  first,  that,  as  there  is  no  such  act 
of  pure  and  simple  love  as  that  of  a  mother  lisping  over  her 
babe  in  order  to  bring  forth  its  faculties,  nor  one  wherein  the 
child  exhibits  so  much  delight  and  fondness  for  its  kind  and 
careful  parent ;  so  those  who  are  honoured  by  God  with  this 
divine  nursing  ought  to  be  conscious  within  themselves  at  the 
time  of  very  great  love  and  sweet  engagement  of  soul  towards 
God.  They  should  feel  drawn  up,  and,  as  it  were,  drawn  out, 
of  themselves  towards  God ;  as  is  a  little  child  in  the  arms  of 
its  mother,  who  fondly  bendeth  over  it,  and  occupieth  its  eye, 
ear,  and  every  sense,  with  her  fond  and  faithful  ministry  of 
teaching.  The  second  observation  is,  that  the  view  which  we 
have  given  is  strongly  confirmed  by  the  apostle's  saying,  that 
"  he  who  speaketh  with  a  tongue  edifieth  himself,"  in  what 
way  "  he  who  prophesieth  edifieth  the  Church,"  (i  Cor.  xii.4:) 
thereby  declaring  that  the  gift  of  tongues  was  an  ordinance 
for  personal  edification  ;  for  making  the  child  to  grow  up  to 
the  full-grown  man.  Also,  he  recommendetli  (ver.  28)  that, 
if  there  be  no  interpretation  at  hand,  he  that  speaketh  with 
tongues  should  "speak  to  himself,  and  to  God;"  shewing 
that  it  was  a  direct  communication  and  correspondence  with 
God  which  in  that  way  was  carried  on.  And,  finally,  (ver.  20,) 
he  saith,  when  rebuking  them  for  speaking  with  the  tongues 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  541 

before  the  Church,  "Brethren,  be  not  children  in  understand- 
ing ;  hovvbeit  in  malice  be  ye  children,  but  in  understanding 
be  men ;"  intimating,  as  I  think,  from  the  reference  to  this 
passage  which  immediately  follows,  that  he  looked  upon 
tongues  as  the  token  of  God's  dealing  with  us  as  with  chil- 
dren ;  to  the  end  that,  being  edified  by  the  Spirit,  we  might 
come  in  the  same  Spirit  to  speak  with  the  understanding  of 
men.  In  one  word,  therefore,  I  gather  from  the  study  of  the 
prophet  that  the  gift  of  tongues  is  a  chief  means  of  God  for 
training  up  the  children  of  the  Spirit  into  the  capacity  of  pro- 
phesying and  speaking  in  the  Church  for  the  edification  of  all, 
whether  "  by  revelation,  or  by  knowledge,  or  by  prophesying, 
or  by  doctrine." 

2.  There  is  yet  another  view  of  the  gift  of  tongues,  to  be 
gathered  from  the  words  and  connexion  of  the  prophecy,  as 
explained  by  the  apostle.  The  general  bearing  of  this  par- 
ticular prediction,  and  the  great  drift  of  these  two  chapters  of 
Isaiah,  is  to  teach  the  great  dishonour  which  the  Lord  was 
about  to  put  upon  the  wisdom  both  of  Jew  and  Greek,  the 
philosophy  of  the  schools  and  the  traditions  of  the  elders,  and 
the  whole  accumulation  of  ancient  lore,  which  had  entram- 
meled  men's  mind  to  the  creature,  and  the.  attainments  of  the 
creature,  and  turned  it  away  from  God  ;  the  introduction  of 
the  foolishness  of  preaching,  instead  of  the  methods  of  learn- 
ing and  science.  This  greatest  intellectual  revolution  which 
the  world  ever  saw ;  this  withdrawal  of  the  soul  from  the 
records  of  ages  to  the  milk  of  the  word,  from  the  way  of 
demonstration  to  the  way  of  faith,  is  shortly  stated  in  these 
words  of  the  29th  chapter,  so  often  referred  to  by  the  Lord, 
as  accomplished  and  accomplishing  in  His  days,  and  by  our 
apostle  also  :  "  Forasmuch  as  this  people  draw  near  me  with 
their  mouth,  and  with  their  lips  do  honour  me,  but  have 
removed  their  heart  far  from  me,  and  their  fear  toward  me  is 
taught  by  the  precept  of  men  ;  therefore,  behold,  I  will  pro- 
ceed to  do  a  marvellous  work  among  this  people,  even  a 
marvellous  work  and  a  wonder :  for  the  wisdom  of  their  wise 
men  shall  perish,  and  the  understanding  of  their  prudent  men 
shall  be  hid,"  (ver.  13,  14.)  This  revolution  was  the  neces- 
sary consequence  of  the  incarnation,  whereby  the  Word  and 


542  THE  GIFTS  OF 

wisdom  of  God,  which  created  all  things  and  reason  itself, 
became  a  conceived  child,  a  babe,  and  passed  through  all 
progressive  stages  up  to  manhood,  "  increasing  in  wisdom 
and  stature,  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man."  And,  seeing 
that  the  Son  of  God  had  taken  this  as  the  true  way  of  glori- 
fying His  Father,  it  became  manifest  that  this  was  the  true 
and  the  best  way ;  and  the  first  principle  of  Christian  dis- 
cipline came  to  be,  "  Ye  must  become  as  little  children,  in 
order  to  be  my  disciples  :  the  greatest  among  you,  let  him 
become  as  this  little  child."  Thus  beginning,  they  would 
grow  up  into  true  wisdom  ;  not  the  wisdom  of  this  world, 
which  cometh  to  naught,  but  the  wisdom  of  God,  even  the 
hidden  wisdom,  which  God  hath  ordained  to  our  glory.  The 
method  of  bringing  men,  already  full  grown  into  the  maturity 
of  years,  and  preoccupied  with  all  the  science  and  literature 
of  their  times,  into  the  state  of  childish  commencements,  was 
by  presenting  the  instruction  in  a  childish  form,  and  refusing 
to  present  it  in  any  other.  And  so  Paul  declares  that  he  had 
done,  and  was  fain  to  do,  in  that  very  Corinthian  Church 
wherein  the  gift  of  tongues  did  so  much  abound:  "And  I, 
brethren,  could  not  speak  unto  you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as 
unto  carnal,  even  as  unto  babes  in  Christ.  I  have  fed  you 
with  milk,  and  not  with  meat :  for  hitherto  ye  were  not  able 
to  bear  it,  neither  yet  now  are  ye  able  :  for  ye  are  yet  carnal. 
For  whereas  there  is  among  you  envying,  and  strife,  and 
divisions,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walk  as  men } "  (i  Cor.  iii, 
1-3.  See  also  chap.  ii.  and  study  it  throughout,  with  a 
reference  to  Isa.  Ixiv.  4,  and  xl.  13,  quoted  therein.)  At  the 
same  time,  however,  that  the  food  of  the  soul  was  ever  pre- 
sented in  the  childish  form,  and  ought  ever  to  be  so  in  preach- 
ing, for  the  purpose  of  recalling  the  people  from  their  self- 
conceit  and  pride  to  the  estate  of  little  children,  and  the 
necessity  of  being  born  again  of  the  Spirit ;  and  there  was 
given,  along  with  this,  mighty  demonstration  and  power  of 
the  Spirit,  to  the  end  that  they  might  not  think  it  was  alto- 
gether a  matter  of  child's  play  and  occupation,  but  that  it 
was  the  very  power  and  wisdom  of  God  :  "  And  my  speech 
and  my  preaching  was  not  with  enticing  words  of  man's 
wisdom,  but   in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power; 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  543 

that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but 
in  the  power  of  God,"  (i  Cor.  ii.  4,  5)  It  was  in  the  simple 
hearing  and  believing  of  the  things  which  the  apostles  so 
simply  spake  to  them,  and  not  in  laborious  deductions,  ar- 
guments, disquisitions,  and  controversies,  as  now  form  the 
matter  of  preaching,  that  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  were  commu- 
nicated ;  according  to  the  appeal  which  the  apostle  makes  to 
the  Galatians :  "  This  only  Avould  I  learn  of  you.  Received 
ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of 
faith?"  (chap.  iii.  2.)  Preaching  by  line  upon  line,  and  precept 
upon  precept,  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,  made  a  demand 
upon  the  hearer,  not  for  deep  cogitations  and  intricate  reason- 
ings, but  for  simple  faith  in  the  things  which  he  heard,  such 
as  a  mother  requires  of  her  little  ones  :  and  this  faith  ap- 
pealed to  another  faculty  than  the  discursive  imagination, 
or  the  understanding  which  comprehends  relations,  even  to 
the  conscience  which  discerneth  God  :  and  as  the  conscience 
cleared  itself  from  its  obscurations,  and  came  to  look  upon 
the  truth,  and  to  receive  it  with  faith,  through  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  followed  thereupon  the  gifts  of 
tongues,  and  other  gifts,  as  seals  of  the  truth  of  the  things 
which  had  been  spoken  and  believed.  And  forasmuch  as 
the  preachers  who  went  about  ministering  the  word  of  the 
Spirit,  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  risen  Christ,  carried  with 
them  these  gifts — which  Timothy  is  more  than  once  ex- 
horted not  to  neglect,  but  to  stir  up — and  the  apostles 
also  had  the  power  of  conferring  them  ;  they  should  have 
served  as  a  complete  protection  to  their  method  of  preaching 
against  the  imputation  of  foolishness,  when  thereby  it  was 
seen  to  be  the  power  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  For  when  the 
power  of  God — the  signs  and  wonders,  and  divers  miracles, 
and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost — were  seen  to  attend  upon  men, 
who  adopted  the  childhood  way  of  teaching,  and  required  the 
childhood  way  of  learning,  which  is  by  faith ;  the  people 
should  have  stood  in  awe  and  said.  This  is  not  to  be  despised, 
but  to  be  weighed  and  considered :  these  men  are  not  fools, 
though  they  seem  foolish  to  our  schoolmen  and  scribes,  for 
they  carry  about  with  them  the  mighty  power  of  God  :  their 
method  is  evidently  God's  method  ;  and  therefore  that  other 


544  THE  GIFTS  OF 

method,  of  sophistry  and  tradition,  God  hath  been  pleased  to 
pass  by,  preferring  this  method,  of  simple  declaration  of  the 
truth,  and  belief  of  the  word  so  declared.  This  now  is  clearly 
the  idea  of  the  prophecy  which  Paul  had  in  his  mind  when 
he  quoted  it  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  : — "  In  the 
law  it  hath  been  written.  That  with  other  tongues  and  with 
other  lips  I  will  speak  to  this  people,  and  not  even  thus  will 
they  hear  me,  saith  the  Lord.  So  that  the  tongues  are  for  a 
sign,  not  to  the  believers,  but  to  the  unbelievers ;  prophecy, 
however,  serveth  not  to  the  unbelievers,  but  to  the  believers." 

It  is  not  yet  the  time  for  going  minutely  into  the  New 
Testament  account  of  these  gifts  ;  but  the  simple  quotation 
of  this  is  sufficient  to  shew,  that  Paul  understood  the  speak- 
ing with  tongues  as  an  additional  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the 
word  spoken  ;  as  it  doubtless  proved  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
when  they  said,  "We  do  all  hear  in  our  own  tongues  the  won- 
derful works  of  God  ;"  and  therefore  he  puts  it  down  as  an 
aggravation  of  their  guilt  in  the  sight  of  a  gracious  God,  that 
they  should  turn  away  their  ear  from  Him,  who  thus  mani- 
festly spoke  to  them  from  heaven.  Then  that  which  was  in- 
tended for  their  good,  turned,  by  their  refusal  of  it,  to  their 
condemnation  ;  and  by  our  prophet  it  is  set  forth  as  the  occa- 
sion of  their  stumbling  and  falling :  "  But  the  word  of  the 
Lord  was  unto  them  precept  upon  precept,  precept  upon  pre- 
cept ;  line  upon  line,  line  upon  line  ;  here  a  little,  and  there  a 
little  ;  that  they  might  go,  and  fall  backward,  and  be  broken, 
and  snared,  and  taken,"  (Isa.  xxviii.  13.)  This  now  yieldeth 
to  us  the  proper  use  of  tongues,  in  respect  to  those  who  heard 
them,  not  having  yet  believed  the  gospel.  They  were  for  a 
sign  to  the  unbelievers  ;  as  it  was  delivered  by  our  Lord  after 
His  ascension,  "  These  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe, 
....  they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues,"  Of  what  was  it 
a  sign  .''  It  was  the  sign  of  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  the 
person  who  spake.  When  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  sign  of  His  presence  in  the  persons 
on  whom  He  had  fallen  was  their  speaking  with  tongues  the 
wonderful  works  of  God,  (Acts  ii. ;)  when  He  fell  on  Cornelius 
and  the  Gentles  as  on  the  apostles  and  the  Jews  at  the  be- 
ginning, they  spake  with  tongues  and  magnified  God  (Acts 


THE  HOL  V  GHOST.  545 

X. ;)  and  so  also,  when  He  was  given  by  the  imposition  of  Paul's 
hands  to  the  converts  at  Ephesus,  they  spake  with  tongues 
and  prophesied,  (Acts  xix.)  Beyond  all  question,  therefore, 
speaking  with  tongues  was  the  sign  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the 
person  who  so  spake.  How  it  should  be  so,  is  another  ques- 
tion ;  but  that  it  was  so,  is  not  for  a  moment  to  be  doubted. 
Peter,  in  his  discourse  on  the  first  occasion  referred  to,  dis- 
tinctly says,  "  This  is  that  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet 
Joel,  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh."  If  the  ques- 
tion be  pressed  upon  us,  How  is  speaking  with  tongues  the 
sign  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  ?  we  answer  in  few  words :  That 
as  the  tongue  or  word  of  man  is  the  sign  of  the  mind  within 
him ;  so,  when  another  spirit,  the  Spirit  of  God,  enters  into 
him.  He  signifieth  His  presence  by  another  tongue  from  that 
which  the  person  himself  useth.  There  are  many  more  uses 
of  the  gift  of  tongues,  but  this  is  the  only  one  which  is  before 
us  at  this  time. 

Taking  all  this  with  us,  let  us  apply  it  to  the  exposition  of 
this  prophecy.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  had  already  spoken  in 
the  prophets,  and  appeared  in  its  fulness  in  Christ  himself. 
These  all  constituted  together  a  body  of  interpreters,  speak- 
ing forth  the  mind  of  God  to  their  several  generations  ;  and 
God  gave  them  witness,  by  divers  miracles,  and  signs,  and 
wonders.  But  still  there  was  no  direct  sign,  declaring  that 
another  spirit  than  their  own  was  in  them.  This  the  people 
were  led  to  gather  from  the  moral  character  of  what  they 
spoke,  the  works  which  they  did,  and,  when  it  concerned  the 
future,  the  fulfilment  of  what  they  predicted.  But  when 
Christ  was  glorified,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  there 
remained  yet  another  mode,  and  that  more  unequivocal,  of 
manifesting  the  finger  of  God,  which  is,  "  their  speaking  with 
new  tongues."  And  to  this,  as  a  great  event  in  the  history  of 
Divine  revelation,  and  as  a  new  evidence  for  receiving  the 
word  which  God  speaketh  from  heaven,  our  prophet  referreth, 
and  adds,  "  yet  they  would  not  hear."  Unless  it  were  an 
additional  argument  of  God's  presence  in  the  speaker,  it  could 
not  be  an  argument  of  additional  hardness  of  heart,  that  the 
hearers  did  not  receive  it :  and  upon  this,  the  simple  and 
obvious  view  of  the  subject,  the  apostle's  argument  comes  out 
VOL.  V.  '       2  M 


546  THE  GIFTS  OF 

simply  and  clearly  :  "  Tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to  them 
that  believe,  but  to  them  that  believe  not."  Those  who  be- 
lieve not  the  word  which  God  speaketh  by  any  of  His 
servants,  are  addressed  in  a  tongue,  that  they  may  be  con- 
vinced that  it  is  not  the  man,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  man, 
who  speaketh.  If,  for  example,  I,  listening  to  any  brother 
prophesying  in  the  church,  should  begin  to  doubt  or  disbe- 
lieve that  the  thing  spoken  was  of  God ;  the  sign  by  which 
God  would  remove  that  doubt  would  be,  to  give  him  to  speak 
some  words  in  a  tongue,  which  might  convince  me  that  it  was 
the  Spirit  of  God  which  both  spake  the  things  preceding  and 
the  things  following  after.  It  is  clear  to  me,  both  from  what 
I  have  witnessed  and  from  what  I  see  written  in  the  word  of 
God  concerning  this  thing,  that  it  was  only  subsidiary  to  the 
work  of  prophesying,  or  magnifying  God,  or  testifying  that 
Jesus  is  Lord.  The  great  and  chief  thing  was,  the  declaration 
of  God's  mind  in  an  intelligible  tongue  ;  the  unknown  tongue 
was  only  the  sign  that  it  was  God's  mind  which  the  person 
was  declaring.  The  prophet,  therefore,  speaking  in  the  Spirit, 
doth  declare,  that,  when  God  should  change  the  manner  of 
His  ministry,  and  speak  unto  the  children  of  men  as  unto 
babes.  He  would  speak  to  them  glad  tidings  of  rest  and  re- 
freshment to  their  wearied  souls  ;  and,  that  they  might  surely 
know  it  was  He,  and  no  other,  who  spake  to  them.  He  would 
adopt  a  style  of  His  own,  called  "  stammering  lips  and  other 
tongues,"  by  the  apostle  "  other  tongues  and  other  lips," 
which  should  exhaust  even  God's  utmost  resources  of  self- 
demonstration.  But  yet  even  thus  they  would  not  hear;  and 
not  only  would  they  cast  away  all  His  gracious  ingenious 
methods  of  bringing  them  to  Himself,  but  even  make  them 
occasions  of  stumbling,  and  falling,  and  being  snared,  and 
taken  ; — teaching  us  that  this  mode  of  testimony  was  the 
greatest  and  the  last,  and  that  there  remained  no  other  in  the 
power  of  God  ;  the  last  arrow  in  His  quiver  for  carrying  con- 
viction to  the  heart  of  an  unbelieving  generation  :  there  is  no 
further  parley,  but  straightway  the  judgment  of  God  taketh 
its  effect.  "  Wherefore,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  scorn- 
ful men  that  rule  this  people  which  is  in  Jerusalem."  To  the 
people  in  Jerusalem,  to  the  priests  and  the  scribes,  and  the 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  547 

learned  doctors,  this  promise  was  particularly  addressed  ;  and 
to  them  the  accomplishment  of  it  came,  in  a  manner  the  most 
wonderful  and  notorious,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  till  which 
time  the  Lord  had  commanded  His  disciples  to  tarry  there. 
He  spake  to  them  in  other  tongues  and  with  other  lips  :  but 
they  would  not  hear  Him  ;  and  so  the  destruction  came  upon 
them  to  the  uttermost.  All  this  is  most  true,  and  answereth 
precisely  to  the  prophecy.  And  if  so  be  that  in  the  Church 
of  Scotland  the  Lord  hath  begun  to  speak  in  this  same  way, 
let  her  consider  these  things,  and  tremble  for  her  approaching 
judgment  if  she  reject  the  Lord  thus  speaking.  These,  then, 
are  the  two  views  of  the  gift  of  tongues  which  we  gather  from 
the  prophet.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  context  of  the  New 
Testament  where  it  is  quoted,  and  endeavour  to  discover  what 
more  lig^ht  is  afforded  to  us  from  thence. 

TL  The  conviction  expressed  above,  concerning  the  use  of 
the  gift  of  tongues,  is  borne  in  upon  my  mind,  not  only  by  the 
use  of  further  evidence  which  both  the  prophet  and  apostle 
declare  to  be  in  tongues,  and  by  the  nature  of  the  sign  itself, 
but  alsD  by  the  fact,  that,  in  all  cases  where  it  is  mentioned 
in  the  Acts,  it  is  connected  with  prophesying  and  magnifying 
God.  But  still  more  from  the  14th  chapter  of  the  Corinthians 
is  it  manifest  that  tongues  were  but  the  sign,  and  that  the 
message  of  God  was  the  thing  signified,  which  the  person 
speaking  with  the  tongue  went  on  straightway  to  declare. 
This  is  not  so  clear  from  our  translation  of  some  of  the  pas- 
sages, n-hich  I  shall  therefore  render  exactly  after  the  original. 
"  And  be  zealous  for  spiritual  gifts ;  the  rather,  however,  to 
the  end  ye  may  prophesy."  That  it  is  speaking  with  tongues 
whic"!  he  hath  in  his  eye,  is  manifest  from  what  follows :  "  For 
he  speaking  with  a  tongue  speaketh  not  to  men,  but  to  God ; 
for  no  one  heareth :  in  spirit  indeed  he  speaketh  mysteries. 
But  he  prophesying,  speaketh  to  men  for  edification,  and  ex- 
ha1:ation,  and  comfort."  A  tongue,  therefore,  is  for  com- 
munication between  a  man's  soul  and  God,  which  ought  to 
pass  on  secretly,  and  not  in  the  audience  of  third  parties,  save 
vhere  there  is  an  interpreter  at  hand,  or  an  unbeliever  who 
^ill  not  give  heed  to  what  is  spoken  in  the  common  language, 


548  THE  GIFTS  OF 

and  needs  to  be  attracted  to  recognise  God  by  some  words 
of  a  tongue  introduced  into  the  bosom  of  a  discourse.  Yet 
these  things,  spoken  in  the  unknown  tongue,  are  not  unmean- 
ing words  or  sentences ;  but  precious  mysteries  of  God,  by 
the  presence  and  utterance  of  which  in  his  soul  he  himself  is 
greatly  edified  ;  though  he  cannot  edify  the  church  unless  he 
prophesy;  as  the  next  verse  expressly  declareth  :  "  He  speak- 
ing with  a  tongue  edifieth  himself,  but  he  prophesying  edifieth 
the  church."  Therefore  it  is  nothing  to  be  doubted,  that 
tongues  are  a  great  instrument  for  personal  edification,  how- 
ever mysterious  it  may  seem  to  us ;  and  they  are  on  that 
account  greatly  to  be  desired,  altogether  independently  of 
their  being  a  sign  unto  others.  And  to  me  it  seemeth  rea- 
sonable to  believe,  that  they  will  be  conferred  in  private  exer- 
cises of  devotion,  and  earnest  longings  after  edification  ;  and, 
being  given,  ought  especially  to  be  occupied  in  secret  actings 
of  the  soul  towards  God ;  and  in  public  only  as  subsidiary  to 
the  work  of  prophesying.  This  latter  use  further  appears  in 
the  next  verse :  "  I  wish,  however,  all  of  you  to  speak  with 
tongues ;  the  rather,  however,  to  the  end  ye  may  prophesy ; 
for  greater  is  he  that  prophesieth  than  he  that  speaketh  with 
tongues,  except  indeed  he  interpret,  to  the  end  the  church 
may  receive  edification."  There  can  be  no  doubt,  therefore, 
that  speaking  with  tongues  is  a  most  desirable  thing,  seeing 
the  apostle  desireth  it  for  them  all ;  and  in  another  place 
(ver.  1 8)  gives  thanks  that  he  spake  with  tongues  more  than 
they  all ;  and,  again,  notwithstanding  the  abuses  of  this  gift 
in  the  church,  commands  (ver.  39)  that  they  "  forbid  not  to 
speak  with  tongues."  But,  withal,  there  is  an  ultimate  end 
to  be  aimed  at,  beyond  present  enjoyment  and  persona',  edi- 
fication, which  is,  that  they  may  prophesy  and  edify  the 
church  when  they  shall  themselves  have  been  edified.  In 
what  way,  he  expresseth  in  the  next  verse :  "  Now,  however, 
brethren,  if  I  come  unto  you  speaking  with  tongues,  waat 
will  I  profit  you,  if  I  shall  not  speak  to  you  either  in  revela- 
tion, or  in  knowledge,  or  in  prophesy,  or  in  teaching  V  These 
now  are  the  forms  of  communication  from  God,  and  the  git 
of  tongues  was  a  sign  to  authenticate  them  as  being  froi 
God.     The  first,  "  revelation,"  I  understand  of  some  secret 


THE  HOL  Y  GHOST.  549 

thing  hidden  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  thus  opened,  answereth, 
I  think,  very  much  to  the  word  of  wisdom.  The  second  is 
"  knowledge ;"  that  is,  the  communication  of  things  which 
may  be  read  and  known  of  all  men  :  what  we  call  tradition, 
or  learning.  The  third  is  "prophecy;"  which  hath  been 
already  defined  to  be  for  edification,  exhortation,  and  comfort 
of  the  church.  And  the  fourth  is  "  teaching,"  for  the  end  of 
bringing  forward  the  children,  and  Instructing  the  ignorant  in 
Christ  Jesus.  To  fit  and  qualify  those  who  filled  these  offices, 
the  gift  of  tongues  was  a  great  means  in  God's  hand,  as  we 
have  shewn  above  ;  but  when  they  had  been  thus  prepared, 
God  expected  that  they  should  give  themselves  to  the  work 
of  building  up  the  church,  perfecting  the  saints,  and  minis- 
tering the  word  of  God.  And  if  they  did,  at  a  time,  in  the 
public  assembly  use  the  gift  of  tongues,  it  was  for  the  pur- 
pose of  convincing  the  incredulous  that  they  had  both  com- 
mission and  information  from  God ;  that  God  was  in  them  of 
a  truth. 

The  six  following  verses  we  pass  over,  as  bringing  no  addi- 
tional light,  but  serving  merely  to  illustrate  the  folly  and  un- 
profitableness of  using  these  gifts  of  tongues  in  the  meetings 
of  the  church,  in  the  way  of  convincing  those  who  doubt,  or 
altogether  disbelieve  that  God  spake  by  them.  At  the  13th 
verse  the  subject  is  thus  resumed  :  "  Therefore,  let  him  who 
speaketh  with  a  tongue  pray  that  he  may  interpret;"  to  the 
end  he  may  be  intelligible  to  those  who  hear  ;  but  it  is  added, 
(ver.  28,)  "  If  there  be  not  an  interpreter,  let  him  keep  silence 
in  the  church,  and  speak  to  himself,  and  to  God."  He  is  not 
prevented  from  exercising  his  gift;  for  it  is  to  his  edification 
to  do  so ;  but  not  aloud,  unless  there  be  some  one  at  hand 
who  hath  the  gift  of  interpretation,  or  he  himself,  in  answer 
to  his  prayer,  shall  receive  that  gift  at  the  time ;  then  he  may 
speak  aloud  and  interpret ;  as  he  proceedeth  :  "  For  if  I  pray 
with  a  tongue,  my  spirit  prayeth  ;  my  mind,  however,  is  un- 
fruitful," Here  is  a  great  distinction  taken, — between  the 
spirit,  which  may  be,  yea  and  is,  all  alive  and  fruitful  in  these 
spiritual  exercises  of  speaking  with  tongues  ;  and  the  under- 
standing, or  mind,  which  is  without  any  advantage  in  itself, 
or  fruit-bearing  towards  God  or  others.     In  this  distinction 


550  THE  GIFTS  OF 

standeth,  as  I  judge,  the  use  of  the  name  "  spirituals,"  which 
throughout  these  chapters  is  appHed  to  a  certain  class  of  gifts, 
or  occupations,  distinguished  from  charity  on  the  one  hand, 
and  from  prophecy  on  the  other.  These  I  understand  to  be 
functions  of  the  renewed  spirit,  which  it  is  capable  of,  alto- 
gether independent  of  the  understanding ;  whose  help  it 
calleth  not  for,  until  out  of  charity  it  desireth  to  minister 
unto  others  the  benefit  which  it  hath  partaken  in  itself 
There  is  much  mystery  in  this,  which  I  am  not  careful  to 
discover,  being  more  intent  upon  knowing  and  teaching  the 
certainty  of  the  thing,  to  the  end  the  church  may  earnestly 
seek  the  communication  of  these  spiritual  functions  from  God 
and  her  Head  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  reality  of  the 
thing  further  appeareth  in  the  following  verses  :  "  What  then 
is  there .''  I  will  pray  with  the  Spirit ;  I  will  pray,  however, 
also  with  the  mind  :  I  will  sing  with  the  Spirit ;  I  will  sing, 
however,  also  with  the  mind."  Prayer  in  a  tongue  is  prayer 
in  the  Spirit,  and  so  also  of  singing :  it  is  true  prayer  and  true 
praise :  and  not  to  be  despised  of  the  person,  nor  yet  of  the 
church,  and  truly  acceptable  with  God :  but  because  it  pass- 
eth  not  into  the  forms  of  the  understanding  by  intelligible 
speech,  he  preferreth  it  not  in  the  church,  neither  will  use  it 
there,  for  the  reason  which  he  addeth :  "  Since,  if  thou  bless 
in  the  Spirit,  how  shall  he  filling  the  place  of  the  unlearned 
say  the  Amen  to  thy  thanksgivings,  since  he  knoweth  not 
what  thou  sayest .''  For  thou,  indeed,  rightly  giveth  thanks, 
but  the  other  is  not  edified :"  and  therefore  cannot  give 
thanks,  nor  even  say  Amen.  To  one  who  believes  what  the 
apostle  writeth,  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  gift 
of  tongues  was  a  means  of  worshipping  God  acceptably  in  all 
ways,  which  ofttimes  was  so  used  in  the  public  meetings  of 
the  church.  This,  not  approving,  he  rebuketh,  because  it 
perplexed  those  in  the  congregation  who  were  raw  and  rude, 
and  but  beginners  in  the  Christian  discipline.  The  word  by 
which  these  are  named  is  translated  wilcmvied ;  whereby  the 
impression  is  conveyed  that  the  knowledge  of  these  tongues 
depended  somehow  or  other  upon  learning.  This  is  a  common 
error  fatal  to  the  understanding  of  this  subject.  It  is  not 
material  to  the  question  whether  these  tongues  were  tongues 


THE  HOL  V  GHOS  T.  551 

of  men  or  of  angels,  or  whether  they  were  in  use  by  any 
creature  at  all.  The  likelihood  is,  from  the  instance  of  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  that  they  were  spoken  by  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  But  it  is  a  gross  error  to  suppose  that  the  use  of  them 
was  at  all  analogous  to  that  which  by  learning  a  man  acquires 
of  a  foreign  language.  Their  mind  was  not  in  the  tongue  at 
all :  they  understood  it  not,  neither  could  they  interpret  it, 
otherwise  than  by  a  supernatural  gift.  No  one  understood 
what  they  said.  Their  spirit  perceived  the  matter,  and  held 
communion  with  God  in  acts  of  spiritual  worship  through  the 
tongue,  which  indicates  the  closest  contact  with  God,  a  drink- 
ing from  the  breasts  of  His  instruction.  But,  withal,  this  did 
not  serve  for  the  instruction  of  others  ;  which  essaying,  they 
must  use  the  common  language,  as  Peter  also  did  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost.  In  order  to  guard  against  the  false  association 
of  learning  with  the  use  of  a  tongue,  I  incline  rather  to  ren- 
der the  word  iSttwri/?,  as  in  Acts  iv.  13,  "ignorant :"  or,  as  in 
2  Cor.  xi.  6,  "  rude ; "  the  only  two  places  where  it  occurs, 
except  in  this  chapter.  I  think  it  means  one  unacquainted 
with  the  discipline  of  the  church,  and  the  manner  of  the 
Spirit :  one,  in  short,  unversed  in  spirituals.  That  these 
babes  may  not  be  disappointed  of  their  edification,  the  apostle 
commandeth  prayer  and  singing  to  be  not  in  the  unknown 
tongue,  but  in  the  common  speech  ;  not  in  the  spirit  only,  but 
in  the  spirit  and  in  the  mind  also.  And  this  he  confirmeth 
by  his  own  feelings  :  "  I  bless  God  I  speak  with  tongues 
more  than  you  all ;  but  in  the  church  I  would  rather  speak 
five  words  through  my  mind,  that  I  might  teach  others  also, 
than  ten  thousand  words  in  a  tongue.  Brethren,  be  not  chil- 
dren in  things  of  the  mind :  but  in  malice  be  childish,  and  in 
things  of  the  mind  be  ye  full-grown  men."  He  would  have 
them  to  pour  their  spiritual  edification  and  exercise  through 
the  forms  of  the  understanding,  that  their  mind  might  grow 
to  its  full  maturity,  and  be  able  to  glorify  God  in  the  midst 
of  reasonable  and  intelligent  men. 

The  apostle  now  referreth  to  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  :  "  In 
the  law  it  hath  been  written,  That  by  other  tongues  and  by 
other  lips  I  will  speak  to  this  people  ;  and  not  even  then  will 
they  give  heed  to  me,  saith  the  Lord  :  so  that  the  tongues 


552  THE  GIFTS  OF 

are  for  a  sign,  not  to  the  believing,  but  to  the  unbelieving ; 
prophecy,  however,  not  for  the  unbelieving  but  for  the  believ- 
ing." Here  again  the  leading  contrast  between  tongues  and 
prophecy  comes  into  view,  with  the  additional  weight  of  the 
prophet's  authority,  who  had  signified  that  to  the  unbelieving 
God  would  add  the  method  of  speaking  with  tongues.  The 
Jews  had  been  incredulous  of  Christ,  and  now  God  keepeth 
His  word,  by  adding  the  promised  sign,  to  shew  them  that 
He  did  verily  speak  in  Christ,  seeing  He  spoke  thus  by  those 
that  believe  in  Christ,  who  spake  not  to  add  anything  to  what 
Christ  spake,  but  brought  a  new  sign  that  God  had  verily 
spoken  in  Christ,  and  did  speak  by  the  members  of  Christ's 
body.  To  this  Christ  alludes  when  He  says,  that  He  would 
send  among  them  prophets,  and  wise  men,  and  scribes,  whom 
they  would  reject,  and  so  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  cup. 
"  If,  therefore,  the  whole  church  come  together  to  the  same 
place,  and  all  speak  with  tongues,  and  there  come  in  ignorant 
or  unbelieving  ones,  will  they  not  say  that  ye  are  mad  ,-'  If, 
however,  all  prophesy,  and  there  enter  one  unbelieving  or 
ignorant,  he  is  convinced  under  all,  he  is  judged  under  all ; 
and  thus  the  secrets  of  his  heart  become  manifest ;  and  so, 
falling  upon  his  face,  he  will  worship  God,  reporting  that  God 
really  is  in  you."  In  the  language  of  the  primitive  church, 
ainaTOL,  which  we  have  translated  unbelievers,  meant  not  infi- 
dels, or  pagans,  but  all  who  were  in  the  condition  of  cate- 
chumens, and  not  yet  admitted  to  baptism,  of  whom  there 
were  always  not  a  few  in  the  church.  The  ISioJraL,  which  we 
translate  unlearned,  were  those  who  filled  no  office  in  the 
church ;  were  not  amongst  the  rj^ovyievoi,  or  conductors  and 
leaders  of  the  church,  who  took  part  in  its  services.  I  do 
not  say  that  these  distinctions  were  exactly  defined  in  the 
apostle's  time,  although  both  Chrysostom  (Hom.  35)  and 
Theodoret  (Com.  in  i  Cor.  xiv.  16)  give  it  as  their  interpreta- 
tion of  the  passage,  but  merely  to  prevent  the  notion  attached 
in  our  times  to  the  expression  "  unlearned  or  unbeliever 
entering  the  church,"  as  if  it  signified  persons  who  were  not 
learned  in  the  tongues,  or  heathen  and  pagans.*  My  own 
notion  is,  that  "  the  whole  church,"  means  those  who  were 
*  For  full  information  upon  this  subject,  and  proofs  from  the  fathers,  I  refer 


THE  HOL  V  GHOST.  553 

endowed  with  gifts,  and  thereby  brought  into  their  place  in 
the  body  of  Christ,  in  whom  God  plainly  dwelt  by  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Spirit ;  that  the  unbelievers  are  those  who 
were  inquiring  into  the  faith,  and  had  not  yet  confessed 
Christ :  the  others  are  the  persons  who  having  been  baptized, 
have  not  yet  received  any  distinguishing  gift,  but  were  like 
the  private  soldiers  of  the  army,  or  the  common  people  in  a 
nation.  With  this  understanding  of  the  words,  the  meaning 
of  the  passage  is,  that,  if  any  of  the  inquirers  who  were  com- 
ing and  going,  but  not  yet  joined  to  Christ,  should  enter  and 
find  the  whole  time  occupied  in  speaking  with  tongues,  what 
would  they  think  but  that  the  people  were  mad  ?  whereas,  if 
they  should  be  prophesying  in  order.  He  would  find  that  they 
had  insight  into  His  heart,  which  belongeth  only  to  God, 
and  would  fall  down  and  worship  God,  and  acknowledge  its 
truth  that  God  was  in  these  people ;  for  how  otherwise  should 
they  be  enabled  to  know  His  heart  ?  It  is  not  meant  that 
the  prophets  knew  the  heart  of  every  man  ;  but  that  the 
words  put  into  their  mouths  by  God,  the  heart-searcher,  an- 
swered so  exactly  to  the  thoughts  in  the  hearts  of  the  people 
present,  that  they  should  be  constrained  to  acknowledge  that 
it  was  not  man  but  God  who  spoke.  Tongues  were  a  sign  of 
this  indwelling  of  God,  but  prophesying  is  the  certainty  of  it ; 
and  both  together  bring  the  perfect  and  complete  demonstra- 
tion of  the  Spirit :  to  refuse  which  is  to  resist  God,  and  to 
bring  upon  ourselves  swift  destruction. 

The  apostle  then  proceeds  to  set  things  in  order  in  respect 
to  this  gift  of  tongues,  and  in  his  instructions  casts  some  fur- 
ther light  upon  the  subject :  we  will  follow  it  rapidly  to  the 
end.  "  What  then  is  there,  brethren .-'  whenever  ye  come 
together,  each  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  hath  a  doctrine,  hath  a 
tongue,  hath  a  revelation,  hath  an  interpretation  :  let  all  things 
be  done  for  edification."  He  is  still  speaking  in  respect  to 
their  meetings  in  the  church  for  the  common  good ;  and  re- 
quires of  them  to  exercise  good  husbandry  over  the  teeming 
exuberance  of  their  spiritual  manifestations.  We  may  notice 
the  five  varieties  :  a  psalm  for  joy,  blessing,  praise,  and  thanks- 

my  readers  to  *'  Bingham's  Antiquities  of  the  Christian  Church,"  book  i.,  chap. 
iii.-v. 


554  THE  GIFTS  OF 

giving;  a  doctrine  out  of  the  fulness  of  knowledge  with 
which  some  were  endowed  ;  a  revelation  out  of  the  fulness  of 
wi;  dom,  as  I  think  ;  a  tongue  out  of  the  fulness  of  the  present 
Spirit,  moving  to  speak  ;  and  an  interpretation  out  of  the  same 
Spirit,  moving  to  interpret  and  explain  what  is  spoken.  "  If, 
however,  with  a  tongue  any  one  speak,  by  two,  or  at  most  by 
three,  and  in  turn,  and  let  one  interpret  :  and  if  there  be  not 
an  interpreter,  let  him  be  silent  in  the  church ;  to  himself, 
however,  let  him  speak  and  to  God."  I  know  not  whether  the 
expression,  "by  two,  or  at  most  by  three,  and  in  turn,"  means 
that  so  many  words  or  sentences  were  to  be  uttered  at  a  time, 
and  then  the  interpreter  was  to  do  his  office.  This  is  the  most 
obvious  view  of  it ;  and  I  see  none  better.  "  Of  prophets, 
however,  let  two  or  three  speak,  and  let  the  rest  discern :  and 
if  to  another  sitting  (aught)  should  be  revealed,  let  the  first 
keep  silence.  For  ye  can  all,  one  by  one,  prophesy ;  that  all 
may  learn,  and  all  may  derive  comfort.  And  the  spirits  of 
prophets  to  the  prophets  are  subject :  for  he  is  not  of  turbu- 
lence the  God,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  churches  of  the 
saints."  This  gives  the  ordinance  of  the  prophets,  permitting 
two  or  three  to  speak  during  the  meeting,  and  requiring  the 
rest  to  discern  the  drift,  intention,  and  use  of  the  thing  thus 
spoken  to  the  church  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  while,  at  the  same 
time,  it  contemplates,  that,  by  this  observance  of  order,  all 
might  come  to  edify  the  church.  For  it  is  evident,  that  pro- 
phecy was  meant  to  be  the  prerogative  of  all ;  and  to  speak 
with  tongues  the  means  of  edifying  a  man  thereunto.  Fur- 
ther, the  prophets  are  instructed  that  their  spirits  are  subject 
to  their  will  ;  and  therefore  capable  of  government  without 
offence  unto  the  Holy  Spirit ;  yea,  and  the  prophets  are  re- 
sponsible for  the  right  government  of  the  same.  The  gifted 
man's  responsibility  remaineth  all  the  same,  only  that  now  he 
hath  an  additional  stewardship.  And  therefore  the  apostle 
requires,  that  if  any  one  of  the  church  sitting  by  should  have 
a  thing  revealed  to  him,  while  some  other  is  prophesying,  that 
one  shall  hold  his  peace  till  his  brother  hath  delivered  the 
instant  communication  of  God.  There  is  in  all  this  a  great 
beauty,  and  a  most  gracious  aspect  of  the  Lord's  identity 
with  His  Church ;  and  withal  a  most  marvellous  opening  of 


THE  HOL  V  GHOST.  555 

the  communications  which  are,  or  ought  ever  to  be,  going  on 
between  the  assembled  people  and  the  great  Head  over  all. 
Are  these  things  only  to  be  read  as  the  record  of  things  and 
times  gone  by  and  dead,  out  of  mind  ?  or  are  they  still  per- 
mitted to  our  faith  and  hope  ?  and  shall  not  our  souls  taste 
them  ;  our  churches  enjoy  them  again  ?  Both  shall  our  souls 
taste  them,  and  the  churches  shall  enjoy  them  ;  because  the 
gifts  and  calliiigs  of  God  are  without  repentance.  When  He 
glorified  His  Son  Jesus,  He  GAVE  Him  thus  glorified,  and  in 
might  exalted,  to  the  Church  ;  and  He  IS  OURS  in  the  same 
fulness  of  Godhead  as  heretofore,  let  doctors  dispute  as  they 
may,  and  let  appearances  favour  their  dark  and  dismal  con- 
clusion, that  all  these  blessed  intercourses  and  correspondences 
of  love  have  ceased  from  the  Church  on  earth  for  ever.  Then 
follows  an  instruction  concerning  the  deportment  of  women 
in  the  meetings  of  the  church,  which  is  as  follows  :  "  Let  your 
women  in  the  churches  be  silent  :  for  it  is  not  permitted  them 
to  speak ;  but  to  be  under  authority,  as  the  law  also  saith 
And  should  they  wish  to  learn  any  thing,  let  them  at  home 
question  their  own  husbands  :  for  it  is  indecent  for  women  to 
speak  in  the  church."  This  rule  is  literally  to  be  observed  in 
the  meetings  of  the  church  ;  but  not  elsewhere :  yet,  in  all 
places  and  times,  the  spirit  of  it  is  to  be  observed ;  that  is,  a 
woman  is  to  feel  and  act  under  the  sense  of  her  subordination 
to  man.  But  she  is  at  full  liberty  everywhere,  save  in  the 
church,  met  under  its  rulers  for  the  observance  of  its  ordi- 
nances, to  speak  whatever  the  Spirit  may  move  her  to  speak  ; 
and  that  women  have  with  men  an  equal  distribution  of 
spiritual  gifts,  is  not  only  manifest  from  the  fact,  (Acts  ii., 
xviii.  26,  xxi.  9 ;  i  Cor.  xi.  3,  &c.,)  but  from  the  very  words 
of  the  prophecy  of  Joel  itself,  which  may  well  rebuke  those 
vain  and  thoughtless  people  who  make  light  of  the  Lord's 
work,  because  it  appeareth  much  among  women.  I  wish  men 
would  themselves  be  subject  to  the  word  of  God,  before  they 
lord  it  so  over  women's  equal  rights  in  the  great  outpouring 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward, 
that  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh  ;  and  your  sons 
and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy,  your  old  men  shall  dream 
dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see  visions  :  and  also  upon  the 


556  THE  GIFTS  OF 

servants  and  upon  the  handmaids  in  those  days  will  I  pour 
out  my  Spirit,"  (Joel  ii.  28,  29.)  Who  am  I  that  I  shall  des- 
pise the  gift  of  God,  because  it  is  in  a  woman,  whom  the  Holy 
Ghost  despiseth  not  ?  These  are  all  the  shifts  of  infidelity, 
and  the  manifestations  of  cruelty.  For,  of  all  cruel  things, 
mockery  and  levity  is  the  most  fearful. 

Finally.  The  apostle  concludeth  his  discourse,  and  we  close 
our  commentary,  with  a  word  both  of  authority  and  encour- 
agement, "  Came  the  word  of  God  out  from  you  ">  or  did  it 
meet  with  you  only  .-•"  This  is  a  stern  and  cutting  rebuke  to 
their  arrogancy  and  self-sufficiency  as  a  church  ;  their  under- 
valuing the  apostle's  prerogative  ;  and  their  ingratitude  for 
his  services.  And  it  is  followed  by  an  uncompromising  and 
determined  assertion  of  His  apostolical  authority :  "  If  any 
one  seem  to  be  a  prophet,  or  spiritual,  let  him  acknowledge 
what  I  write,  that  they  are  the  Lord's  commandments."  This 
seals  every  thing  which  hath  been  given  above  as  command- 
ments of  Christ  ;  which,  if  we  love  Him,  we  must  obey  ;  and 
puts  the  disorderly  and  disobedient  into  the  awful  predicament 
of  resisting  the  Lord.  And,  methinks,  it  speaks  terribly  to 
those  who  look  upon  the  whole  subject  as  buried  under  six- 
teen centuries  of  oblivion  ;  and  count  the  subject  not  to  be 
worthy  of  a  thought.  Hear  what  follows  :  "  And  if  any  one 
be  ignorant,  ignorant  let  him  be  ;"  and  not  claim  to  be  what 
he  is  not,  nor  make  his  ignorance  the  rule  or  guide  to  an- 
other's knowledge.  Yet  so,  alas !  it  is  become.  They  pride 
themselves  in  their  ignorance,  and  count  this  to  be  the  way  of 
safety  and  wisdom  ;  and  would  lord  it  over,  not  only  those 
who  desire  to  know  and  study  the  subject,  but  even  over  those 
who  give  manifest  proofs  of  possessing  the  gift.  Yea,  Paul 
had  all  our  experience  of  the  pride  of  ignorance,  and  taught 
us  how  to  deal  with  it.  And  now  comes  the  conclusion  of  all : 
"  So  that,  brethren,  be  zealous  after  the  prophesying,  and  the 
speaking  with  tongues  hinder  not.  Let  all,  however,  proceed 
decently  and  with  order."  He  had  required  them  at  the 
beginning  to  be  zealous  after  spirituals,  and  rather  in  the  view 
of  prophesying  ;  now  he  requires  them  to  be  zealous  after 
prophesying,  and  not  to  restrain  speaking  with  tongues,  but 


THE  HOL  Y  GHOST.  557 

merely  to  put  it  under  the  good  husbandry  of  an  ordinance. 
And  being  so  instructed,  I  do,  as  one  bearing  rule  in  the 
Christian  Church,  call  upon  all  and  every  one  of  the  members 
of  Christ  to  covet  earnestly,  and  fervently  to  pray  for,  spiritual 
gifts,  speaking  with  tongues  and  prophesying ;  and  this  whe- 
ther they  understand  these  expositions  or  not.  For  faith 
standeth  in  the  receiving  and  obeying  of  the  word  of  God  ;  and 
understanding  followeth  the  possession  of  what  we  pray  for. 

We  have  been  so  much  more  bent  upon  discovering  God's 
mind  than  giving  forth  our  own,  that  we  have  left  little  room 
for  conclusions  ;  which,  therefore,  we  shall  just  enumerate. 

First,  That  the  gift  of  tongues  is  the  stammering  lips  and  fo- 
reign tongue,  through  which  God  communicates  to  men  the  word 
and  the  power  of  that  glorious  rest  and  refreshing,  which  the 
gospel  proclaims  unto  the  world  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 

Secondly,  That  the  chief  reason  of  this  ordinance  is  to  make 
void  and  empty  the  eloquence  and  arguments,  and  other  na- 
tural ornaments  of  human  speech,  and  to  shew  that  God  edifies 
the  soul,  in  a  manner  wholly  independent  thereof,  by  direct 
communications  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  the  milk  of  our 
babyhood,  the  power  in  the  word  to  nourish  any  soul. 

Thirdly,  That  the  utterance  of  tongues  which  no  one  under- 
standeth,  not  even  he  that  speaketh  them,  is  the  forthcoming 
of  the  soul  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  thus  directly  conveyed 
from  God,  and  desirous  to  express  the  delight,  the  love,  the 
humiliation,  the  righteous  indignation,  the  pity,  the  entreaty, 
or  other  affections  with  which  God  hath  filled  it,  and  of  which 
it  thus  manifests  both  the  presence  and  the  tendency. 

Fourthly,  That  this  is  the  manifestation  of  a  universal  truth 
which  every  pious  soul  knows  ;  namely,  that  God  feeds  us  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  from  Christ,  without  any  inter- 
vention of  book  or  other  person,  by  meditation,  lifting  up  of 
the  soul,  and,  in  one  word,  communion.  And  this  utterance 
is  the  consequence  of  the  inspiration,  the  word  spoken  flowing 
from  the  word  indwelling :  the  knowledge  in  the  reason  out 
of  which  the  word  cometh,  is  itself  the  production  of  God 
working  in  the  spirit,  or  will,  which  is  the  fountain-head 
wherein  all  the  wellsprings  of  thought  and  word  are  con- 
tained, and  out  of  which  they  all  flow. 


558  THE  GIFTS  OF 

Fifthly,  That  when  this  inworking  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
the  spirit  of  a  man  getteth  vent,  not  in  an  unknown  tongue, 
but  in  the  forms  of  the  reason  through  natural  speech  of  man, 
it  becomes  prophecy  of  one  form  or  another,  word  of  wisdom, 
word  of  knowledge,  word  of  teaching,  &c.  ;  and  when  it  keeps 
the  form  of  the  unknown  tongue,  and  is  interpreted  by  one 
who  hath  the  Holy  Ghost  for  interpretation,  it  standeth  to 
the  church  exactly  in  the  same  place  as  prophecy,  though  it 
be  not  profitable  to  the  mind  of  the  persons  through  whom 
it  proceedeth. 

Sixthly,  In  either  of  these  cases  the  church  is  to  hear  with 
reverence,  but  not  to  receive  without  discrimination.  They 
are  to  try  the  thing  by  the  word  of  God  abiding  in  their 
conscience,  or  written  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth.  And  if  it 
consort  not  with  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  which  is  the  spirit  of 
prophecy,  they  are  to  reject  it  either  as  presumptuous  or  as 
the  inspiration  of  an  unclean  spirit.  And  this  duty  the  Church 
oweth  to  Christ  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  taketh  nothing 
but  Christ's  things  to  shew  them  to  our  souls,  and  to  the 
Father  who  hath  given  all  things  into  the  Son's  hands,  "  so 
that  all  which  the  Father  hath  are  His,"  (John  xvi.  2  ;)  and 
"  no  man  knoweth  the  Father  but  the  Son,  and  he  to  whom 
the  Son  shall  reveal  Him,"  (Matt,  xi.)  The  church  dare  not 
blindly  receive  anything  from  any  man  or  spirit,  be  he  or  do 
he  what  he  may  ;  but  must  weigh  it  in  the  balances  of  the 
sanctuary,  which  is  the  word  of  God,  opened  to  us  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whereof  every  believer  hath  the  seal. 

Seventhly,  That  because  this  gift  of  tongues  and  prophe- 
sying, which  is  its  fruit,  are  the  constant  demonstrations  of  God 
dwelling  in  a  man,  and  teaching  him  all  spiritual  things  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  without  help  of  any  third  thing  or  third  party, 
to  the  great  undervaluing  and  entire  disannulling  of  the  powers 
of  natural  reason  and  speech  as  a  fountain-head  of  divine 
instruction  :  therefore  they  must  ever  be  fatal  to  the  pride 
of  intellect,  to  the  prudence  and  wisdom  of  the  world,  to  the 
scheming,  counselling,  and  wise  dealing  of  the  natural  man  ; 
to  all  mere  philosophers,  theologians,  poets,  sages,  and  wits 
of  every  name  ;  yea,  makes  war  upon  them,  brings  them  to 
nought,  and  utterly  defeats  their  pretensions  to  do  anything 


THE  HOL  V  GHOST.  559 

for  man  in  the  way  of  the  glorious  rest  and  the  refreshing. 
It  is  needful,  therefore,  that  all  scribes  and  learned  men,  philo- 
sophers and  statesmen,  and  men  of  worldly  gifts,  and  all  men 
whatsoever,  should  become  as  little  children;  as  those  who 
are  weaned  from  the  milk  and  drawn  from  the  breast,  in  order 
to  be  fed  and  nourished  of  God  in  this  spiritual  way,  which  is 
the  only  real  way,  and  of  which  speaking  with  tongues  is  only 
the  manifestation. 

Eighthly,  That  so  becoming,  there  is  not  any  believer  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  ought  not  to  desire  and  to  pray  for, 
and  who  may  not  expect,  the  gift  of  tongues  for  his  own 
spiritual  edification  ;  and  being  received  he  ought  to  use  it 
privately  and  frequently  for  his  own  spiritual  edification,  but 
not  in  the  meetings  of  the  church,  unless  there  be  interpre- 
tation at  hand.  Yet  in  the  meetings  of  one  or  two  brethren, 
who  are  ignorant  of  the  gift,  and  desire  reverently  to  witness 
the  exercise  thereof,  he  may  without  offence  exercise  it :  at 
the  same  time  desiring  that  a  word  of  interpretation:  should 
be  given,  or  the  power  of  prophesying  in  the  known  tongue, 
which  also  I  believe  will  always  be  afforded  when  the  gift  is 
thus  piously  and  for  edification  occupied. 

Ninthly,  That,  though  it  be  not  received,  we  should  not  be 
disheartened,  as  if  we  were  rejected  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
had  not  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  us :  because  it  is  but  the 
sign  of  a  universal  truth,  concerning  the  communication  be- 
tween God  and  man,  through  Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
without  any  intervention  ;  and  that  this  is  the  only  way 
through  which  the  weary  and  heavy-laden  sinner  can  come  to 
rest ;  wherefore  also  the  Holy  Ghost  is  called  the  Comforter. 
If  any  person,  therefore,  having  laid  hold  of  this  truth,  is  living 
in  the  faith  and  enjoyment  of  it,  he  is  to  be  assured  of  his 
salvation,  and  to  be  at  peace:  yet  is  he  to  desire  to  speak 
with  tongues,  in  order  to  convince  an  unbelieving  and  ignor- 
ant world,  who  will  be  ever  trusting  to  book-reading,  or 
man-teaching,  or  self-sufficiency,  or  some  other  form  of  error, 
instead  of  trusting  to  the  indwelling  operation  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ.  The  tongue  is  but  the  sign  and  manifestation  to  the  un- 
believer :  to  the  believer  it  is  a  means  of  grace,  for  the  end  of 
edifying  himself,  that  he  may  edify  the  whole  body  of  the  saints. 


56o  THE  GIFTS  OF 

Tenthly,  That  with  all  this  down-throwing  of  the  natural 
faculties  of  reason,  and  reasonable  speech,  which  the  gift  of 
tongues  doth  bring  along  with  it,  it  is  only  to  the  end  of  their 
true  edification  on  the  sure  basis  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  is  the  power  and  the  wisdom  of  God :  inasmuch  as  the 
apostle  teacheth  us  that  it  is  not  good  the  understanding 
should  be  unfruitful ;  but  requires  that  it  should  put  forth  its 
utmost  energies  under  the  guidance  of  the  spirit  informed  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  And  now  comes  the  scope  of  eloquence, 
and  the  creativeness  of  poetry,  and  the  pathos  of  love,  and  the 
ardours  of  entreaty,  and  the  range  of  knowledge,  and  the 
revelation  of  wisdom,  and  everything  else  whereby  man 
standeth  aloft  at  the  summit  of  creation's  scale. 

Eleventhly,  That  the  true  reason  why  the  gift  of  tongues 
hath  ceased  to  be  in  the  Church  is,  the  exaltation  of  the 
natural  methods  of  teaching  above,  or  into  copartnery  with, 
the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  meanness  of  our  idea, 
and  the  weakness  of  our  faith,  concerning  the  oneness  of 
Christ  glorified,  with  His  Church  on  earth  :  the  unworthiness 
of  our  doctrine  concerning  the  person  and  office  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  to  knit  up  the  believer  into  complete  oneness  with 
Christ,  every  thread  and  filament  of  our  mortal  humanity 
with  His  humanity,  immortal  and  glorious ;  to  bring  down 
into  the  Church  a  complete  Christ,  and  keep  Him  there,  ever 
filling  her  bosom,  and  working  in  her  members ;  the  short- 
coming of  our  knowledge,  in  respect  to  the  gifts  themselves ; 
our  having  ceased  to  lament  their  absence,  and  to  pray  for 
their  return  ;  our  want  of  fasting,  and  humiliation,  and  crying 
unto  the  Lord ;  our  contentment  to  be  without  them  ;  our 
base  and  false  theories  to  account  for  their  absence,  without 
taking  guilt  to  ourselves.  Any  one  of  these  causes  were  suffi- 
cient, all  of  them  are  far  more  than  sufficient,  to  account  for 
their  long  absence  from  the  bosom  of  the  Church.  These 
are  the  true  reasons ;  and  the  commonly  given  reason,  that 
they  were  designed  only  for  a  short  time,  is  utterly  false  and 
most  pernicious. 

For,  finally,  the  gifts  and  callings  of  God  are  without  re- 
pentance. What  He  created  man  to  be,  man  is  responsible 
for,  and  shall  yet  yield — namely,  the  image  of  God,  and  a 


THE  HOLY  GHOST.  561 

subdued  world  :  what  He  gave  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  by- 
promise,  Abraham  and  his  seed  are  responsible  for,  and  shall 
yet  possess  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  prove  the  blessing  of 
all  nations  of  the  earth :  and  what  He  gave  to  the  Church, 
when  He  gave  us  a  risen  Jesus  to  be  ours  in  full  possession, 
by  the  continual  dwelling  with,  and  dwelling  in  us,  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Church  is  responsible  for,  and  shall  for  ever  pos- 
sess. All  these,  through  wickedness,  mankind,  the  Jews,  and 
the  Church,  have  lost  hold  of,  and  they  are  sHpt  out  of  our 
hand.  But  who  dares  to  say  that  God  intended  man  to  be 
good  only  for  a  short  time,  and  that  man's  badness  is  not  his 
crime  and  guilt,  but  God's  original  intention }  or  who  dares 
preach  to  the  Jew  that  his  expatriation  and  misery  is  not  due 
to  his  sinfulness  ?  and  who,  then,  dares  preach  to  the  Church 
that  her  present  loss  of  her  gifts,  and  hiding  of  her  glorious 
power,  and  inexperience  of  a  risen  and  glorified  Christ,  is  not 
due  to  her  sin  and  unfaithfulness }  Oh,  the  multitude  of 
preachers  who  are  publishing  this,  know  not  how  they  vex 
and  dishonour  God,  how  they  impoverish  and  oppress  the 
Church.  But  those  who  attribute  this  our  nakedness,  to  our 
own  sin,  and  guilt,  and  sloth,  and  saying  that  our  Lord  is  a 
hard  master,  having  nothing  but  doubts  to  give  ;  and  who 
call  upon  the  Church  to  awake  and  arouse  herself  from  the 
dust,  and  put  on  her  beautiful  garments ;  who  cry  aloud  and 
confess  her  sin,  and  intercede  with  the  Lord  for  forgiveness  ; 
who  fast  and  put  on  sackcloth,  and  give  the  Lord  no  rest ; 
these  are  the  people,  be  they  ministers  or  members  of  Christ, 
who  shall  soon  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord. 


VOL.  V.  2  N 


APPENDIX 


TREATISE  ON  THE  INCARNATION. 


[Mr  Irving's  opinions  on  the  human  nature  of  Christ  being  fully 
developed  in  the  Treatise  on  the  Incarnation,  I  have  considered  it 
unnecessary  to  include  in  this  Collection  of  his  Writings  the  various 
treatises  of  a  more  controversial  character  which  were  called  forth  by  the 
attacks  made  upon  that  work.  The  most  important  of  them  was  that 
entitled  "  On  the  Human  Nature  of  Christ,"  and  it  was  followed  by 
"  Christ's  Holiness  in  the  Flesh."  The  following  is  the  Preface  to  the 
first  of  these,  which  I  give  because  in  it  Mr  Irving  states  with  singular 
clearness  the  substance  of  the  controversy,  and  guards  himself  against 
misconstruction.  -It  was  ostensibly  for  his  opinions  on  this  subject  that 
he  was  deposed  (in  technical  phraseology)  from  being  a  minister  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland. — Ed.] 

//  is  necessary  to  inform  the  reader,  before  entering  upon  the  perusal 
of  this  tract,  that  whenever  I  attribute  sinful  properties  and  dispositions 
and  inclinations  to  our  Lord's  human  nature,  I  am  speaking  of  it  con- 
sidered as  apart  from  Him,  in  itself;  I  am  defining  the  qualities  of 
that  nature  which  He  took  upon  Him,  and  demonstrating  it  to  he  the 
very  same  in  substance  with  that  tuhich  we  possess.  To  understand  the 
work  which  He  did,  you  must  understand  the  materials  with  which  He 
did  it.  The  work  which  He  did  was  to  reconcile,  sanctify,  quicken, 
and  glorify  this  nature  of  ours,  which  is  full  of  sin,  and  death,  and 
rebellion,  and  dishonour  unto  God.  The  most  part  of  those  who  are 
opposed  to  the  truth  agree  in  this ;  but  differ  from  us  in  maintaining 
that  the  substance  of  human  nature  underwent  a  change  in  the  miracu- 
lous conception.  We  maintain  that  it  underwent  no  change,  but  was 
full  of  fellowship  and  community  with  us  all  His  life  long,  and  was  not 


564  APPENDIX. 

changed  but  by  the  resurrection.  We  hold  that  it  received  a  Holy 
Ghost  life,  a  regenerate  life,  in  the  conception  :  in  kind  the  same  which 
■we  receive  in  regeneration,  but  in  measure  greater,  because  of  His 
perfect  faith  :  which  perfect  faith  He  was  enabled  to  give  by  being  a 
Divine  Person,  of  one  substance  with  the  Father.  The  thing,  therefore, 
which  we  maintain  is.  That  as  Adam  was  the  perfect  man  of  creation, 
Jesus  was  the  perfect  man  of  regeneration  ;  perfect  in  holiness,  by  being 
perfect  in  faith;  perfect  in  faith,  though  all  the  created  universe  strove 
to  alienate  Him  from  God ;  and  prevailing  to  believe  in  the  Father, 
against  the  universe,  through  the  divinity  of  His  person ;  which  was 
thereby  proved  to  be  uncreated,  and  above  creation,  by  prevailing 
against  a  rebellious  creation,  with  which  He  clothed  Himself,  and  under 
whose  load  He  came.  And  we  further  maintain,  that  there  is  no  other 
way  of  seeing  His  divinity  in  action  save  by  this  only,  that  His  union 
tvith  the  Father  by  faith  stood  good  against  the  tvhole  creation,  and  pre- 
vailed to  dratv  creation  out  of  the  hands  of  its  oppressors  back  again,  and 
to  reconcile  it  unto  God.  All  which  is  a  dead  letter,  a  fiction,  a  folly, 
if  so  be  that  His  creature  nature  was  not  part  and  parcel  of  the  fallen 
and  rebellious  creation,  in  reconciling  which  He  reconciled  all.  This  is 
the  substance  of  our  argument :  that  His  human  nature  was  holy  in 
the  only  ivay  in  which  holiness  under  the  fall  exists  or  can  exist,  is 
spoken  of  or  can  be  spoken  of  in  Scripture,  namely,  through  inworking 
or  energising  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  not  from  the  Holy  Ghost  mixed  up 
with  either  the  substance  of  body  or  soul — which  is  to  confound  God- 
head and  manhood — but  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  under  the  direction  of  the 
Son,  enforcing  His  human  nature,  ijiclining  it,  uniting  it  to  God ;  even 
as  the  devil,  likewise  a  spirit,  without  mixing  in  it,  did  enforce  it  away 
^rom  God.  And  thus  doth  Christ  in  the  salvation  of  every  sinner  resist, 
overcome,  and  destroy  the  devil s  power  and  work. 

2.  There  is  a  metaphysical  point  which  greatly  affects  the  mider- 
standing  of  this  tract,  upon  which  it  is  Jiecessary  that  I  should  say  a 
word  in  this  preface.  It  is  concerning  that  which  constitutes  a  mans 
personality  or  individuality .  The  common  thing  created  by  God  in 
Adam,  was  created  in  His  oivn  image,  after  His  own  likeness ;  and  is, 
therefore,  our  complete  being,  visible  and  invisible,  flesh  and  reason,  or, 
as  it  is  commonly  denominated,  body  and  soul.  This  is  what  man  wax 
created ;  this  hath  not  been  added  to,  for  creation  never  hath  been 
added  to  ;  it  was  completed  in  the  six  days.  The  commwiity  of  man  is 
therejore  his  compound  nature,  body  and  soul,  flesh  and  reason.  God 
hath  formed  our  hearts  alike,  as  well  as  our  bodies.  Now,  where  lies 
the  individuality,  the  personality,  that  which  we  denominate,  I  myself  j 


APPENDIX.  565 

that  which  God  regards  as  responsible?  I  had  not  proposed  this  to 
myself  as  a  question  when  I  wrote  my  hook  upon  the  Incarnation,  and 
when  I  wrote  the  earlier  part  of  this  tract ;  which  are  therefore  both 
written  under  the  common  notion  that  the  community  is  in  the  fleshy 
and  the  personality  is  in  the  soul :  while  yet  I  perceived  all  alo?ig,  that 
if  there  is  not  a  community  in  Christ's  soul  with  us,  the  community  in 
His  flesh  is  really  nothing  but  an  appearance :  that  is  to  say,  if  His 
^flesh  was  not  united  to  His  mind  by  the  same  laws  as  ours  is.  He  had 
no  community  with  us  whatever  :  and  for  this  I  have  always  stood 
maijily  :  so  that,  however  the  metaphysical  point  of  a  mans  personality 
be  held  by  my  reader,  the  doctrine  which  I  maintain  is  not  qff'ected  by 
it.  At  present,  from  what  study  1  have  been  able  to  give  this  subject, 
I  incline  to  believe  that  the  personality  is  a  property  superinduced  by 
God  upon  that  community  of  body  and  soul  which  we  inherit,  being 
that  which  connects  every  man  with  Himself,  as  responsible  to  Him  for 
that  common  endowment  of  body  and  soul  and  estate  which  He  entrusts 
us  with.  For  certain,  Christ  had  a  body  and  soul  of  man  s  substance, 
without  thereby  having  a  human  person ;  and,  therefore,  we  can  assert 
the  sinfulness  of  the  whole,  the  complete,  the  perfect  human  nature, 
which  He  took,  without  in  the  least  implicating  Him  with  sin  :  yea, 
verily,  seeing  He  subdued  those  properties  which  it  had  in  itself,  and 
m'ade  it  holy,  we  assert  Him  to  be  the  only  Redeemer  of  man  from  sin. 
I  wish  it  to  be  steadily  borne  in  mind  in  reading  this  tract,  that  when- 
ever I  speak  of  the  flesh  of  Christ,  I  mean,  except  when  the  contrary  is 
expressed,  the  whole  creature  part ;  which  is  not  a  person,  but  a  sub- 
stance;  a  substance  which  we  must  describe  by  its  properties  of  sinful- 
ness and  darkness  and  deadness,  in  order  to  understand  the  wonderful 
work  of  redemption  which  Christ  wrought  in  it.  IVhat  was  holy, 
was  His  person ;  and  from  that  came  redemption  into  the  nature  : 
what  was  powerful,  was  the  person  ;  and  from  that  came  strength  into 
the  nature.  Sin,  in  a  nature,  is  its  disposition  to  lead  the  person  away 
from  God  ;  sin  in  a  person,  is  the  yielding  thereto.  All  creation  is 
sinful,  being  in  a  state  of  alienation  from  God :  it  has  one  law  in 
it,  the  law  of  sin ;  and  through  all  its  parts  this  law  binds  it  in 
one  great  sinful  operation.  The  Person  of  the  Son  of  God  was 
born  into  it ;  He  restrained,  withstood,  overcame  this  co-operation  oj 
a  sinful  creation,  conquered  the  conqueror,  and  won  it  back  to  God ; 
obtained  power  over  all  flesh.  This  is  the  great  theme  which  we 
maintain. 

3.  The  great  point  between  us,  the  precious  truth  for  which  we  con- 
tend, is,  nut  whether  Christ's  flesh  was  holy — for  surely  the  man  who 


566  APPENDIX. 

saith  we  deny  this  llasphemeth  against  the  manifest  truth — hut  whether 
during  His  life  it  was  one  with  us  in  all  its  infirmities  and  liabilities  to 
temptation,  or  whether,  by  the  miraculous  generation,  it  underwent  a 
change  so  as  to  make  it  a  different  body  from  the  rest  of  the  brethren. 
They  argue  for  an  identity  of  origin  merely  ;  we  argue  for  an  identity 
of  life  also.  They  argue  for  an  inherent  holiness  ;  we  argue  for  a  holi- 
ness maintained  by  the  person  of  the  Son,  through  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  They  say,  that  though  His  body  was  changed  in  the 
generation,  He  was  still  our  fellow  in  all  temptations  and  sympathies  : 
we  deny  that  it  could  be  so ;  for  change  is  change ;  and  if  His  body 
was  changed  in  the  conception,  it  was  not  in  its  life  as  ours  is.  In  one 
word,  we  present  believers  with  a  real  life  ;  a  suffering,  mortal  flesh  ; 
a  real  death  and  a  real  resurrection  of  this  flesh  of  ours  :  they  present 
the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  a  changed  flesh  :  and  so  create  a 
chasm  between  Him  and  us  which  no  knowledge,  nor  even  imagina- 
tion, can  overleap.  And  in  so  doing,  they  subvert  all  foundations  : 
there  is  nothing  left  standing  in  our  faith  of  Godhead,  in  our  hopes 
of  manhood. 

Finally,  Though  I  have  been  assailed  with  all  maimer  of  personal 
abuse,  both  by  anonymous  writers  in  all  sorts  of  religious  magazines, 
and  likewise  by  ministers  and  doctors  of  the  Church  who  have  been 
honest  enough  to  give  their  names,  I  have  not  once  retaliated  in  that 
kind.  It  is  the  fashion  to  accuse  me  of  being  abusive  and  personal. 
It  is  not  true  of  me  either  as  a  man  or  a  writer.  I  defy  them  to  pro- 
duce out  of  my  writings  one  word  of  uncharitableness  towards  the 
person  oj  any  one ;  a7id  I  am  resolved  to  abide  by  the  Lord's  rule,  never 
to  tell  my  grievance  or  qff'ence  against  any  person  to  the  Church,  until 
I  have  first  sought  to  gain  my  brother  by  private  and  friendly  inter- 
course :  and  I  tell  all  mine  enemies,  that,  until  they  learn  to  walk  by 
the  same  rule  of  love,  they  shall  flounder  on  in  error,  and  never  come  to 
see  or  love  the  truth.  Very  different,  however,  hath  been,  and  ever 
shall  be,  my  carriage  towards  error  in  doctrine  and  schism  in  the 
Church.  These  I  shall  always  call  by  their  proper  names.  I  will  not 
spare  them  :  oh  never  !  As  I  love  the  souls  of  men,  I  will  expose  the 
errors  in  doctrine  and  schisms  in  practice  by  which  they  are  holden  far 
off  from  God.     God  right  his  own  truth  !     Amen. 

EDWARD  IRVING. 

National  Scotch  Church,  London, 
io(/i  Jan.  1830. 


JSallaniyne,  Roberts,  (Sr  Company,  Printers,  Edinburgh. 


Princeton   Theological   Seminary   Libraries 


1    1012   01195   4429 


Date  Due 


,'vqmmmmmmmifiim 


