Verbatim capture (excerpt) for reference 202609010830.
Source page: Internet Medieval Sourcebook (Fordham University),
"Anselm (1033-1109): Proslogium", https://sourcebooks.fordham.edu/basis/anselm-proslogium.asp
Translation: Sidney Norton Deane (Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company, 1903, reprinted 1926).
Public-domain translation; etext via Christian Classics Ethereal Library, spellings modernized by the Sourcebook.
Fetched: 2026-09-01T08:22:00Z to 2026-09-01T08:23:00Z via curl through the session's egress proxy;
HTML converted to plain text (tags stripped), whitespace preserved as extracted.
Excerpt scope: Preface and Chapters I-V (the ontological argument and the attribute chapters
immediately following). The rest of the page (Chapters VI-XXVI, source note) was fetched but only
the source note is appended below. The fool's-response material (Gaunilo) is on a separate page
and was not captured.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   PREFACE.

  In this brief work the author aims at proving in a single argument the existence of
    God, and whatsoever we believe of God. --The difficulty of the task. --The author writes
    in the person of one who contemplates God, and seeks to understand what he believes. To
    this work he had given this title: Faith Seeking Understanding. He finally named it
    Proslogium, --that is, A Discourse.

  AFTER I had published, at the solicitous entreaties of certain brethren, a brief work
    (the Monologium) as an example of meditation on the grounds of faith, in the person
    of one who investigates, in a course of silent reasoning with himself, matters of which he
    is ignorant; considering that this book was knit together by the linking of many
    arguments, I began to ask myself whether there might be found a single argument which
    would require no other for its proof than itself alone; and alone would suffice to
    demonstrate that God truly exists, and that there is a supreme good requiring nothing
    else, which all other things require for their existence and well-being; and whatever we
    believe regarding the divine Being.

  Although I often and earnestly directed my thought to this end, and at some times that
    which I sought seemed to be just within my reach, while again it wholly evaded my mental
    vision, at last in despair I was about to cease, as if from the search for a thing which
    could not be found. But when I wished to exclude this thought altogether, lest, by busying
    my mind to no purpose, it should keep me from other thoughts, in which I might be
    successful; then more and more, though I was unwilling and shunned it, it began to force
    itself upon me, with a kind of importunity. So, one day, when I was exceedingly wearied
    with resisting its importunity, in the very conflict of my thoughts, the proof of which I
    had despaired offered itself, so that I eagerly embraced the thoughts which I was
    strenuously repelling.

  Thinking, therefore, that what I rejoiced to have found, would, if put in writing, be
    welcome to some readers, of this very matter, and of some others, I have written the
    following treatise, in the person of one who strives to lift his mind to the contemplation
    of God, and seeks to understand what he believes. In my judgment, neither this work nor
    the other, which I mentioned above, deserved to be called a book, or to bear the name of
    an author; and yet I thought they ought not to be sent forth without some title by which
    they might, in some sort, invite one into whose hands they fell to their perusal. I
    accordingly gave each a title, that the first might be known as, An Example of Meditation
    on the Grounds of Faith, and its sequel as, Faith Seeking Understanding. But, after, both
    had been copied by many under these titles, many urged me, and especially Hugo, the
    reverend Archbishop of Lyons, who discharges the apostolic office in Gaul, who instructed
    me to this effect on his apostolic authority --to prefix my name to these writings. And
    that this might be done more fitly, I named the first, Monologium, that is, A
    Soliloquy; but the second, Proslogium, that is, A Discourse.

   

   CHAPTER I.

  Exhortation of the mind to the contemplation of God. --It casts aside cares, and
    excludes all thoughts save that of God, that it may seek Him. Man was created to see God.
    Man by sin lost the blessedness for which he was made, and found the misery for which he
    was not made. He did not keep this good when he could keep it easily. Without God it is
    ill with us. Our labors and attempts are in vain without God. Man cannot seek God, unless
    God himself teaches him; nor find him, unless he reveals himself. God created man in his
    image, that he might be mindful of him, think of him, and love him. The believer does not
    seek to understand, that he may believe, but he believes that he may understand: for
    unless he believed he would not understand.

  Up now, slight man! flee, for a little while, your occupations; hide yourself, for a
    time, from your disturbing thoughts. Cast aside, now, your burdensome cares, and put away
    your toilsome business. Yield room for some little time to God; and rest for a little time
    in him. Enter the inner chamber of your mind; shut out all thoughts save that of God, and
    such as can aid you in seeking him; close your door and seek him. Speak now, my whole
    heart! speak now to God, saying, I seek your face; your face, Lord, will I seek (Psalms
    xxvii. 8). And come you now, O Lord my God, teach my heart where and how it may seek you,
    where and how it may find you.

  Lord, if you are not here, where shall I seek you, being absent? But if you are
    everywhere, why do I not see you present? Truly you dwell in unapproachable light. But
    where is unapproachable light, or how shall I come to it? Or who shall lead me to that
    light and into it, that I may see you in it? Again, by what marks, under what form, shall
    I seek you? I have never seen you, O Lord, my God; I do not know your form. What, 0 most
    high Lord, shall this man do, an exile far from you? What shall your servant do, anxious
    in his love of you, and cast out afar from your face? He pants to see you, and your face
    is too far from him. He longs to come to you, and your dwelling-place is inaccessible. He
    is eager to find you, and knows not your place. He desires to seek you, and does not know
    your face. Lord, you are my God, and you are my Lord, and never have I seen you. It is you
    that hast made me, and has made me anew, and has bestowed upon me all the blessing I
    enjoy; and not yet do I know you. Finally, I was created to see you, and not yet have I
    done that for which I was made.

  0 wretched lot of man, when he has lost that for which he was made! 0 hard and terrible
    fate! Alas, what has he lost, and what has he found? What has departed, and what remains?
    He has lost the blessedness for which he was made, and has found the misery for which he
    was not made. That has departed without which nothing is happy, and that remains which, in
    itself, is only miserable. Man once did eat the bread of angels, for which he hungers now;
    he eateth now the bread of sorrows, of which he knew not then. Alas! for the mourning of
    all mankind, for the universal lamentation of the sons of Hades! He choked with satiety,
    we sigh with hunger. He abounded, we beg. He possessed in happiness, and miserably forsook
    his possession; we suffer want in unhappiness, and feel a miserable longing, and alas! we
    remain empty.

  Why did he not keep for us, when he could so easily, that whose lack we should feel so
    heavily? Why did he shut us away from the light, and cover us over with darkness? With
    what purpose did he rob us of life, and inflict death upon us? Wretches that we are,
    whence have we been driven out; whither are we driven on? Whence hurled? Whither consigned
    to ruin? From a native country into exile, from the vision of God into our present
    blindness, from the joy of immortality into the bitterness and horror of death. Miserable
    exchange of how great a good, for how great an evil! Heavy loss, heavy grief heavy all our
    fate!

  But alas! wretched that I am, one of the sons of Eve, far removed from God! What have I
    undertaken? What have I accomplished? Whither was I striving? How far have I come? To what
    did I aspire? Amid what thoughts am I sighing? I sought blessings, and lo! confusion. I
    strove toward God, and I stumbled on myself. I sought calm in privacy, and I found
    tribulation and grief, in my inmost thoughts. I wished to smile in the joy of my mind, and
    I am compelled to frown by the sorrow of my heart. Gladness was hoped for, and lo! a
    source of frequent sighs!

  And you too, O Lord, how long? How long, O Lord, do you forget us; how long do you turn
    your face from us? When will you look upon us, and hear us? When will you enlighten our
    eyes, and show us your face? When will you restore yourself to us? Look upon us, Lord;
    hear us, enlighten us, reveal yourself to us. Restore yourself to us, that it may be well
    with us, --yourself, without whom it is so ill with us. Pity our toilings and strivings
    toward you since we can do nothing without you. You do invite us; do you help us. I
    beseech you, O Lord, that I may not lose hope in sighs, but may breathe anew in hope.
    Lord, my heart is made bitter by its desolation; sweeten you it, I beseech you, with your
    consolation. Lord, in hunger I began to seek you; I beseech you that I may not cease to
    hunger for you. In hunger I have come to you; let me not go unfed. I have come in poverty
    to the Rich, in misery to the Compassionate; let me not return empty and despised. And if,
    before I eat, I sigh, grant, even after sighs, that which I may eat. Lord, I am bowed down
    and can only look downward; raise me up that I may look upward. My iniquities have gone
    over my head; they overwhelm me; and, like a heavy load, they weigh me down. Free me from
    them; unburden me, that the pit of iniquities may not close over me.

  Be it mine to look up to your light, even from afar, even from the depths. Teach me to
    seek you, and reveal yourself to me, when I seek you, for I cannot seek you, except you
    teach me, nor find you, except you reveal yourself. Let me seek you in longing, let me
    long for you in seeking; let me find you in love, and love you in finding. Lord, I
    acknowledge and I thank you that you has created me in this your image, in order that I
    may be mindful of you, may conceive of you, and love you; but that image has been so
    consumed and wasted away by vices, and obscured by the smoke of wrong-doing, that it
    cannot achieve that for which it was made, except you renew it, and create it anew. I do
    not endeavor, O Lord, to penetrate your sublimity, for in no wise do I compare my
    understanding with that; but I long to understand in some degree your truth, which my
    heart believes and loves. For I do not seek to understand that I may believe, but I
    believe in order to understand. For this also I believe, --that unless I believed, I
    should not understand.

   

   CHAPTER II.

  Truly there is a God, although the fool has said in his heart, There is
    no God.

  AND so, Lord, do you, who do give understanding to faith, give me, so far as you
    knowest it to be profitable, to understand that you are as we believe; and that you are
    that which we believe. And indeed, we believe that you are a being than which nothing
    greater can be conceived. Or is there no such nature, since the fool has said in his
    heart, there is no God? (Psalms xiv. 1). But, at any rate, this very fool, when he hears
    of this being of which I speak --a being than which nothing greater can be conceived
    --understands what be hears, and what he understands is in his understanding; although he
    does not understand it to exist.

  For, it is one thing for an object to be in the understanding, and another to
    understand that the object exists. When a painter first conceives of what he will
    afterwards perform, he has it in his understanding, but be does not yet understand it to
    be, because he has not yet performed it. But after he has made the painting, be both has
    it in his understanding, and he understands that it exists, because he has made it.

  Hence, even the fool is convinced that something exists in the understanding, at least,
    than which nothing greater can be conceived. For, when he hears of this, he understands
    it. And whatever is understood, exists in the understanding. And assuredly that, than
    which nothing greater can be conceived, cannot exist in the understanding alone. For,
    suppose it exists in the understanding alone: then it can be conceived to exist in
    reality; which is greater.

  Therefore, if that, than which nothing greater can be conceived, exists in the
    understanding alone, the very being, than which nothing greater can be conceived, is one,
    than which a greater can be conceived. But obviously this is impossible. Hence, there is
    doubt that there exists a being, than which nothing greater can be conceived, and it
    exists both in the understanding and in reality.

   

   CHAPTER III.

  God cannot be conceived not to exist. --God is that, than which nothing greater can be
    conceived. --That which can be conceived not to exist is not God.

  AND it assuredly exists so truly, that it cannot be conceived not to exist. For, it is
    possible to conceive of a being which cannot be conceived not to exist; and this is
    greater than one which can be conceived not to exist. Hence, if that, than which nothing
    greater can be conceived, can be conceived not to exist, it is not that, than which
    nothing greater can be conceived. But this is an irreconcilable contradiction. There is,
    then, so truly a being than which nothing greater can be conceived to exist, that it
    cannot even be conceived not to exist;. and this being you are, O Lord, our God.

  So truly, therefore, do you exist, O Lord, my God, that you can not be conceived not to
    exist; and rightly. For, if a mind could conceive of a being better than you, the creature
    would rise above the Creator; and this is most absurd. And, indeed, whatever else there
    is, except you alone, can be conceived not to exist. To you alone, therefore, it belongs
    to exist more truly than all other beings, and hence in a higher degree than all others.
    For, whatever else exists does not exist so truly, and hence in a less degree it belongs
    to it to exist. Why, then, has the fool said in his heart, there is no God (Psalms xiv.
    1), since it is so evident, to a rational mind, that you do exist in the highest degree of
    all? Why, except that he is dull and a fool?

   

   CHAPTER IV.

  How the fool has said in his heart what cannot be conceived. --A thing may be conceived
    in two ways: (1) when the word signifying it is conceived; (2) when the thing itself is
    understood As far as the word goes, God can be conceived not to exist; in reality he
    cannot.

  BUT how has the fool said in his heart what he could not conceive; or how is it that he
    could not conceive what he said in his heart? since it is the same to say in the heart,
    and to conceive.

  But, if really, nay, since really, he both conceived, because he said in his heart; and
    did not say in his heart, because he could not conceive; there is more than one way in
    which a thing is said in the heart or conceived. For, in one sense, an object is
    conceived, when the word signifying it is conceived; and in another, when the very entity,
    which the object is, is understood.

  In the former sense, then, God can be conceived not to exist; but in the latter, not at
    all. For no one who understands what fire and water are can conceive fire to be water, in
    accordance with the nature of the facts themselves, although this is possible according to
    the words. So, then, no one who understands what God is can conceive that God does not
    exist; although he says these words in his heart, either without any or with some foreign,
    signification. For, God is that than which a greater cannot be conceived. And he who
    thoroughly understands this, assuredly understands that this being so truly exists, that
    not even in concept can it be non-existent. Therefore, he who understands that God so
    exists, cannot conceive that he does not exist.

  I thank you, gracious Lord, I thank you; because what I formerly believed by your
    bounty, I now so understand by your illumination, that if I were unwilling to believe that
    you do exist, I should not be able not to understand this to be true.

   

   CHAPTER V.

  God is whatever it is better to be than not to be; and he, as the only self-existent
    being, creates all things from nothing.

  WHAT are you, then, Lord God, than whom nothing greater can be conceived? But what are
    you, except that which, as the highest of all beings, alone exists through itself, and
    creates all other things from nothing? For, whatever is not this is less than a thing
    which can be conceived of. But this cannot be conceived of you. What good, therefore, does
    the supreme Good lack, through which every good is? Therefore, you are just, truthful,
    blessed, and whatever it is better to be than not to be. For it is better to be just than
    not just; better to be blessed than not blessed.

   


[Appended from the same page:]
  Source.

  St. Anselm: Proslogium; Monologium: An Appendix In Behalf Of The Fool By Gaunilo;
    And Cur Deus Homo, Translated From The Latin By Sidney Norton Deane, B. A. With An
    Introduction, Bibliography, And Reprints Of The Opinions Of Leading Philosophers And
    Writers On The Ontological Argument, (Chicago, The Open Court Publishing Company,, 1903,
    reprinted 1926)

  Etext (with permission) from the Christian Classics
    Ethereal Library, here modernized in some spellings.
