Capture of https://www.newadvent.org/summa/1003.htm
Reference note id: 202609042070
Fetched: 2026-09-04T19:56:49Z
Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae I, Question 3 (The simplicity of God), Fathers
of the English Dominican Province translation (1920) as published by New Advent
-- public domain. Captured: the question's list of its eight articles, Article 4
("Whether essence and existence are the same in God?") and Article 7 ("Whether
God is altogether simple?"). Articles 1-3, 5, 6 and 8 and the site navigation
are not captured.

===== QUESTION 3 HEADING AND ARTICLE LIST =====

Question 3. The simplicity of God
 Is God a body? Is He composed of matter and form? Is there composition of quiddity, essence or nature, and subject in Him? Is He composed of essence and existence? Is He composed of genus and difference? Is He composed of subject and accident? Is He in any way composite, or wholly simple? Does He enter into composition with other things?

===== ARTICLE 4 =====

Article 4. Whether essence and existence are the same in God?
 Objection 1. It seems that essence and existence are not the same in God . For if it be so, then the divine being has nothing added to it. Now being to which no addition is made is universal being which is predicated of all things. Therefore it follows that God is being in general which can be predicated of everything. But this is false : "For men gave the incommunicable name to stones and wood" ( Wisdom 14:21 ). Therefore God's existence is not His essence .
 Objection 2. Further, we can know "whether" God exists as said above ( I:2:2 ); but we cannot know "what" He is. Therefore God's existence is not the same as His essence —that is, as His quiddity or nature .
 On the contrary, Hilary says (Trin. vii): "In God existence is not an accidental quality , but subsisting truth ." Therefore what subsists in God is His existence .
 I answer that, God is not only His own essence , as shown in the preceding article, but also His own existence . This may be shown in several ways.
 First, whatever a thing has besides its essence must be caused either by the constituent principles of that essence (like a property that necessarily accompanies the species —as the faculty of laughing is proper to a man —and is caused by the constituent principles of the species ), or by some exterior agent—as heat is caused in water by fire. Therefore, if the existence of a thing differs from its essence , this existence must be caused either by some exterior agent or by its essential principles. Now it is impossible for a thing's existence to be caused by its essential constituent principles, for nothing can be the sufficient cause of its own existence , if its existence is caused . Therefore that thing, whose existence differs from its essence , must have its existence caused by another. But this cannot be true of God ; because we call God the first efficient cause . Therefore it is impossible that in God His existence should differ from His essence .
 Secondly, existence is that which makes every form or nature actual; for goodness and humanity are spoken of as actual, only because they are spoken of as existing. Therefore existence must be compared to essence , if the latter is a distinct reality, as actuality to potentiality . Therefore, since in God there is no potentiality , as shown above ( Article 1 ), it follows that in Him essence does not differ from existence . Therefore His essence is His existence .
 Thirdly, because, just as that which has fire, but is not itself fire, is on fire by participation; so that which has existence but is not existence , is a being by participation. But God is His own essence , as shown above ( Article 3 ) if, therefore, He is not His own existence He will be not essential, but participated being. He will not therefore be the first being—which is absurd. Therefore God is His own existence , and not merely His own essence .
 Reply to Objection 1. A thing that has nothing added to it can be of two kinds. Either its essence precludes any addition; thus, for example, it is of the essence of an irrational animal to be without reason. Or we may understand a thing to have nothing added to it, inasmuch as its essence does not require that anything should be added to it; thus the genus animal is without reason , because it is not of the essence of animal in general to have reason ; but neither is it to lack reason . And so the divine being has nothing added to it in the first sense; whereas universal being has nothing added to it in the second sense.
 Reply to Objection 2. "To be" can mean either of two things. It may mean the act of essence , or it may mean the composition of a proposition effected by the mind in joining a predicate to a subject. Taking "to be" in the first sense, we cannot understand God's existence nor His essence ; but only in the second sense. We know that this proposition which we form about God when we say " God is," is true ; and this we know from His effects ( I:2:2 ).

===== ARTICLE 7 =====

Article 7. Whether God is altogether simple?
 Objection 1. It seems that God is not altogether simple. For whatever is from God must imitate Him. Thus from the first being are all beings; and from the first good is all good . But in the things which God has made, nothing is altogether simple. Therefore neither is God altogether simple.
 Objection 2. Further, whatever is best must be attributed to God . But with us that which is composite is better than that which is simple; thus, chemical compounds are better than simple elements, and animals than the parts that compose them. Therefore it cannot be said that God is altogether simple.
 On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iv, 6,7): " God is truly and absolutely simple."
 I answer that, The absolute simplicity of God may be shown in many ways.
 First, from the previous articles of this question. For there is neither composition of quantitative parts in God , since He is not a body; nor composition of matter and form ; nor does His nature differ from His "suppositum"; nor His essence from His existence ; neither is there in Him composition of genus and difference, nor of subject and accident . Therefore, it is clear that God is nowise composite, but is altogether simple.
 Secondly, because every composite is posterior to its component parts, and is dependent on them; but God is the first being, as shown above ( I:2:3 ).
 Thirdly, because every composite has a cause , for things in themselves different cannot unite unless something causes them to unite. But God is uncaused, as shown above ( I:2:3 ), since He is the first efficient cause .
 Fourthly, because in every composite there must be potentiality and actuality ; but this does not apply to God ; for either one of the parts actuates another, or at least all the parts are potential to the whole.
 Fifthly, because nothing composite can be predicated of any single one of its parts. And this is evident in a whole made up of dissimilar parts; for no part of a man is a man, nor any of the parts of the foot, a foot. But in wholes made up of similar parts, although something which is predicated of the whole may be predicated of a part (as a part of the air is air, and a part of water, water), nevertheless certain things are predicable of the whole which cannot be predicated of any of the parts; for instance, if the whole volume of water is two cubits, no part of it can be two cubits. Thus in every composite there is something which is not it itself. But, even if this could be said of whatever has a form , viz. that it has something which is not it itself, as in a white object there is something which does not belong to the essence of white; nevertheless in the form itself, there is nothing besides itself. And so, since God is absolute form , or rather absolute being, He can be in no way composite. Hilary implies this argument, when he says (De Trin. vii): " God , Who is strength, is not made up of things that are weak; nor is He Who is light, composed of things that are dim."
 Reply to Objection 1. Whatever is from God imitates Him, as caused things imitate the first cause . But it is of the essence of a thing to be in some sort composite; because at least its existence differs from its essence , as will be shown hereafter, ( I:4:3 ).
 Reply to Objection 2. With us composite things are better than simple things, because the perfections of created goodness cannot be found in one simple thing, but in many things. But the perfection of divine goodness is found in one simple thing ( I:4:1 and I:6:2 ).
