Verbatim capture (three excerpts) for reference 202609011033.
Charles Hodge, Systematic Theology, Volume I (New York: Scribner, Armstrong,
and Co., 1872-73). Public domain. Etext: Christian Classics Ethereal Library,
https://www.ccel.org/ccel/hodge/theology1.html (plain-text cache:
https://www.ccel.org/ccel/h/hodge/theology1/cache/theology1.txt).
Fetched: 2026-09-01T10:32:00Z to 2026-09-01T10:33:00Z via curl through the
session's egress proxy.
Excerpt A: Part I, ch. I ("Origin of the Idea of God"), sections 1-3 -- the
knowledge of God as innate, not due to a process of reasoning, not due
exclusively to tradition.
Excerpt B: Part I, ch. II ("Theism"), opening of section 3 ("The Teleological
Argument") -- its nature and syllogistic statement.
Excerpt C: Part I, ch. IV ("The Knowledge of God"), section 1 ("God can be
known") complete, including "Our Knowledge of God Partial"; the excerpt ends
where section 2 ("God cannot be fully known") begins.
The [EXCERPT ...] markers are file structure, not source text.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[EXCERPT A]
   § 1. The Knowledge of God is Innate.

   A. What is meant by Innate Knowledge.

   By innate knowledge is meant that which is due to our constitution, as
   sentient, rational, and moral beings. It is opposed to knowledge
   founded on experience; to that obtained by ab extra instruction; and to
   that acquired by a process of research and reasoning.

   It cannot be doubted that there is such knowledge, i.e., that the soul
   is so constituted that it sees certain things to be true immediately in
   their own light. They need no proof. Men need not be told or taught
   that the things thus perceived are true. These immediate perceptions
   are called intuitions, primary truths, laws of belief, innate
   knowledge, or ideas. Provided we understand what is meant, the
   designation is of minor importance. The doctrine of innate knowledge,
   or intuitive truths, does not imply that the child is born with
   knowledge in conscious exercise in the mind. As knowledge is a form or
   state of the intelligence, and as that is a state of consciousness,
   knowledge, in the sense of the act of knowing, must be a matter of
   consciousness; and, therefore, it is said, cannot be innate. The
   new-born child has no conscious conviction of the existence of God. But
   the word knowledge is sometimes used in a passive sense. A man knows
   what lies dormant in his mind. Most of our knowledge is in that state.
   All the facts of history stored in the memory, are out of the domain of
   consciousness, until the mind is turned to them. It is not
   inconceivable, therefore, that the soul as it comes into the world may
   be stored with these primary truths which lie dormant in the mind,
   until roused by the due occasion. This, however, is not what is meant
   by innate knowledge. The word innate simply indicates the source of the
   knowledge. That source is our nature; that which is born with us. Nor
   does the doctrine of innate knowledge imply that the mind is born with
   ideas, in the sense of "patterns, phantasms, or notions," as Locke
   calls them; nor that it is furnished by nature with a set of abstract
   principles, or general truths. All that is meant is, that the mind is
   so constituted that it perceives certain things to be true without
   proof and without instruction.

   These intuitive truths belong to the several departments of the senses,
   the understanding, and our moral nature. In the first place, all our
   sense perceptions are intuitions. We apprehend their objects
   immediately, and have an irresistible conviction of their reality and
   truth. We may draw erroneous conclusions from our sensations; but our
   sensations, as far as they go, tell us the truth. When a man feels
   pain, he may refer it to the wrong place, or to a wrong cause; but he
   knows that it is pain. If he sees an object, he may be mistaken as to
   its nature; but he knows that he sees, and that what he sees is the
   cause of the sensation which he experiences. These are intuitions,
   because they are immediate perceptions of what is true. The conviction
   which attends our sensations is due not to instruction but to the
   constitution of our nature.

   In the second place, there are intuitions of the intellect. That is,
   there are certain truths which the mind perceives to be true
   immediately, without proof or testimony. Such are the axioms of
   geometry. No man needs to have it proved to him that the part of a
   thing is less than the whole; or that a straight line is the shortest
   distance between two given points. It is an intuitive truth that
   "nothing" cannot be a cause; that every effect must have a cause. This
   conviction is not founded on experience, because experience is of
   necessity limited. And the conviction is not merely that every effect
   which we or other men have observed has had a cause; but that in the
   nature of things there can be no effect without an adequate cause. This
   conviction is said to be an innate truth, not because the child is born
   with it so that it is included in its infant consciousness, nor because
   the abstract principle is laid up in the mind, but simply because such
   is the nature of the mind, that it cannot but see these things to be
   true. As we are born with the sense of touch and sight, and take
   cognizance of their appropriate objects as soon as they are presented;
   so we are born with the intellectual faculty of perceiving these
   primary truths as soon as they are presented.

   In the third place, there are moral truths which the mind intuitively
   recognizes as true. The essential distinction between right and wrong;
   the obligation of virtue; responsibility for character and conduct;
   that sin deserves punishment; are examples of this class of truths. No
   man needs to be taught them. No one seeks for further evidence of their
   being truths than that which is found in their nature.

   There is another remark to be made in reference to the intuitions of
   the mind. The power of intuitional perception is capable of being
   increased. It is in fact greater in one man than in other men. The
   senses of some persons are far more acute than those of others. The
   senses of hearing and touch are greatly exalted in the case of the
   blind. It is the same with the intellect. What is self-evident to one
   man, has to be proved to another. It is said that all the propositions
   of the First Book of Euclid were as plain at first sight to Newton as
   the axioms. The same is true in our moral and religious nature. The
   more that nature is purified and exalted, the clearer is its vision,
   and the wider the scope of its intuitions. It is not easy to see,
   therefore, why Sir William Hamilton should make simplicity a
   characteristic of intuitive truths. If a proposition be capable of
   resolution into simpler factors, it may still to a powerful intellect
   be seen as self-evidently true. What is seen immediately, without the
   intervention of proof, to be true, is, according to the common mode of
   expression, said to be seen intuitively.

   It is, however, only of the lower exercises of this power that we can
   avail ourselves in our arguments with our fellow men. Because a truth
   may be self-evident to one mind, it does not follow that it must be so
   to all other minds. But there is a class of truths so plain that they
   never fail to reveal themselves to the human mind, and to which the
   mind cannot refuse its assent. Hence the criteria of those truths which
   are accepted as axioms, and which are assumed in all reasoning, and the
   denial of which renders all faith and all knowledge impossible, are
   universality and necessity. What all believe, and what all men must
   believe, is to be assumed as undeniably true. These criteria indeed
   include each other. If a truth be universally admitted, it must be
   because no man can rationally call it to question. And if it be a
   matter of necessary belief it must be accepted by all who possess the
   nature out of the constitution of which the necessity arises.

   B. Proof that the Knowledge of God is Innate.

   The question now is, Whether the existence of God is an intuitive
   truth? Is it given in the very constitution of our nature? Is it one of
   those truths which reveal themselves to every human mind, and to which
   the mind is forced to assent? In other words, has it the
   characteristics of universality and necessity? It should be remarked
   that when universality is made a criterion of intuitive truths, it is
   intended to apply to those truths only which have their foundation or
   evidence in the constitution of our nature. As to the external world,
   if ignorance be universal, error may be universal. All men, for
   example, for ages believed that the sun moves round the earth; but the
   universality of that belief was no evidence of its truth.

   When it is asked, Whether the existence of God is an intuitive truth,
   the question is equivalent to asking, Whether the belief in his
   existence is universal and necessary? If it be true that all men do
   believe there is a God, and that no man can possibly disbelieve his
   existence, then his existence is an intuitive truth. It is one of those
   given in the constitution of our nature; or which, our nature being
   what it is, no man can fail to know and to acknowledge.

   Such has been the common opinion in all ages. Cicero [130] says: "Esse
   Deos, quoniam insitas eorum, vel potius innatas cognitiones habemus."
   Tertullian [131] says of the heathen of his day, that the common people
   had a more correct idea of God than the phtilosophers. Calvin [132]
   says "Hoc quidem recte judicantibus semper constabit, insculptum
   mentibus humanis esse divinitatis sensum, qui deleri nunquam potest."
   The whole tendency in our day is, to make the existence of God so
   entirely a matter of intuition as to lead to the disparagement of all
   argument in proof of it. This extreme, however, does not justify the
   denial of a truth so important as that God has not left any human being
   without a knowledge of his existence and authority.

   The word God, however, is used in a very wide sense. In the Christian
   sense of the word, "God is a spirit, infinite, eternal, and
   unchangeable, in his being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness,
   and truth." This sublime idea of God no human mind ever attained either
   intuitively or discursively, except under the light of a supernatural
   revelation. On the other hand, some philosophers dignify motion, force,
   or the vague idea of the infinite, with the name of God. In neither of
   these senses of the word is the knowledge of God said to be innate, or
   a matter of intuition. It is in the general sense of a Being on whom we
   are dependent, and to whom we are responsible, that the idea is
   asserted to exist universally, and of necessity, in every human mind.
   It is true that if this idea is analyzed, it will be found to embrace
   the conviction that God is a person, and that He possesses moral
   attributes, and acts as a moral governor. Nothing is asserted as to how
   far this analysis is made by uneducated and uncivilized men. All that
   is maintained is that this sense of dependence and accountability to a
   being higher than themselves exists in the minds of all men.

   The Knowledge of God is Universal.

   In proof of this doctrine, reference may be made --

   1. To the testimony of Scripture. The Bible asserts that the knowledge
   of God is thus universal. This it does both directly and by necessary
   implication. The Apostle directly asserts in regard to the heathen as
   such without limitation, that they have the knowledge of God, and such
   knowledge as to render their impiety and immorality inexcusable.
   "Because that when they knew God," he says, "they glorified him not as
   God, neither were thankful." (Rom. i. 19-21.) He says of the most
   depraved of men, that they know the righteous judgment of God, that
   those who commit sin are worthy of death. (Rom. i. 32.) The Scripture
   everywhere addresses men as sinners; it calls upon them to repent; it
   threatens them with punishment in case of disobedience: or promises
   pardon to those who turn from their sins. All this is done without any
   preliminary demonstration of the being of God. It assumes that men know
   that there is a God, and that they are subject to his moral government.
   It is true that the Bible at times speaks of the heathen as not knowing
   God, and says that they are without God. But this, as explained by the
   context in which such declarations appear, and by the general teaching
   of the Scriptures, only means that the heathen are without correct, or
   saving knowledge of God; that they are without his favour, do not
   belong to the number of his people, and of course are not partakers of
   the blessedness of those whose God is the Lord. In teaching the
   universal sinfulness and condemnation of men: their inexcusableness for
   idolatry and immorality, and in asserting that even the most degraded
   are conscious of guilt and just exposure to the divine judgment, the
   Bible takes for granted that the knowledge of God is universal, that it
   is written on the heart of every man.

   This is still more apparent from what the Bible teaches of the law as
   written on the heart. The Apostle tells us that those who have a
   written revelation, shall be judged by that revelation; that those who
   have no externally revealed law, shall be judged by the law written on
   the heart. That the heathen have such a law, he proves first, from the
   fact that "they do by nature the things contained in the law," i. e.,
   they do under the control of their nature the things which the law
   prescribes; and secondly, from the operations of conscience. When it
   condemns, it pronounces something done, to be contrary to the moral
   law; and when it approves, it pronounces something to be conformed to
   that law. (Rom. ii. 12-16.) The recognition of God, therefore, that is,
   of a being to whom we are responsible, is involved in the very idea of
   accountability. Hence every man carries in the very constitution of his
   being as a moral agent, the evidence of the existence of God. And as
   this sense of sin and responsibility is absolutely universal, so must
   also, according to the Bible, be the knowledge of God.

   2. The second argument in favor of the universality of this knowledge,
   is the historical one. History shows that the religious element of our
   nature is just as universal as the rational or social one. Wherever men
   exist, in all ages and in all parts of the world, they have some form
   of religion. The idea of God is impressed on every human language. And
   as language is the product and revelation of human consciousness, if
   all languages have some name for God, it proves that the idea of God,
   in some form, belongs to every human being.

   Objections to the Assumption that the Knowledge of God is Universal.

   There are two objections often urged against the doctrine that the
   knowledge of God results from the very constitution of our nature, and
   is therefore universal. The one is, that travellers and missionaries
   report the existence of some tribes so degraded that they could
   discover in them no traces of this knowledge. Even if the fact be
   admitted that such tribes have no idea of God, it would not be
   conclusive. Should a tribe of idiots be discovered, it would not prove
   that reason is not an attribute of our nature. If any community should
   come to light in which infanticide was universal, it would not prove
   that parental love was not one of the instincts of humanity. But the
   probability is that the fact is not as reported. It is very difficult
   for foreigners to get acquainted with the interior life of those who
   differ from themselves so much in their intellectual and moral
   condition. And besides, Christians attach such an exalted meaning to
   the word God, that when they see no evidence of the presence of that
   exalted conception in the minds of the heathen, they are apt to
   conclude that all knowledge of God is wanting. Unless such people show
   that they have no sense of right and wrong, no consciousness of
   responsibility for character and conduct, there is no evidence that
   they have no knowledge of such a being as God.

   The other objection is drawn from the case of the deaf and dumb, who
   sometimes say that previous to instruction, the idea of God never
   entered their minds. To this the same answer may be given. The
   knowledge obtained by Christian instruction so much surpasses that
   given by intuition, that the latter seems as nothing. It is hardly
   conceivable that a human soul should exist in any state of development,
   without a sense of responsibility, and this involves the idea of God.
   For the responsibility is felt to be not to self, nor to men, but to an
   invisible Being, higher than self, and higher than man.

   The Belief in God Necessary.

   But if it be admitted that the knowledge of God is universal among men,
   is it also a necessary belief? Is it impossible for the mind to
   dispossess itself of the conviction that there is a God? Necessity, as
   remarked above, may be considered as involved in universality, at least
   in such a case as this. There is no satisfactory way of accounting for
   the universal belief in the existence of God, except that such belief
   is founded on the very constitution of our nature. Nevertheless, these
   two criteria of intuitive truths are generally distinguished, and are
   in some aspects distinct.

   The question then is, Is it possible for a sane man to disbelieve in
   the existence of God? This question is commonly answered in the
   negative. It is objected, however, that facts prove the contrary. No
   man has ever been found, who denies that two and two make four, whereas
   atheists abound in every age and in every part of the world.

   There, are, however, different kinds of necessary truths.

   1. Those the opposite of which is absolutely unthinkable. That every
   effect must have a cause, that a part of a given thing is less than the
   whole, are propositions the opposites of which cannot have any meaning.
   When a man says that something is nothing, he expresses no thought. He
   denies what he affirms, and therefore says nothing.

   2. There are truths concerning external or material things, which have
   a power to constrain belief different from that power which pertains to
   truths concerning the mind. A man cannot deny that he has a body; and
   he cannot rationally deny that he has a will. The impossibility in both
   cases may be equal, but they are of different kinds, and affect the
   mind differently.

   3. Again, there are truths which cannot be denied without doing
   violence to the laws of our nature. In such cases the denial is forced,
   and can only be temporary. The laws of our nature are sure sooner or
   later to assert themselves, and constrain an opposite belief. A
   pendulum when at rest hangs perpendicularly to the horizon. It may by
   extraneous force be made to hang at any degree of inclination. But as
   soon as such force is removed, it is sure to swing back to its normal
   position. Under the control of a metaphysical theory, a man may deny
   the existence of the external world, or the obligation of the moral
   law; and his disbelief may be sincere, and for a time persistent; but
   the moment the speculative reasons for his disbelief are absent from
   his mind, it of necessity reverts to its original and natural
   convictions. It is also possible that a man's hand may be so hardened
   or cauterized as to lose the sense of touch. But that would not prove
   that the hand in man is not normally the great organ of touch. So it is
   possible that the moral nature of a man may be so disorganized by vice
   or by a false philosophy as to have its testimony for the existence of
   God effectually silenced. This, however, would prove nothing as to what
   that testimony really is. Besides this, insensibility and the
   consequent unbelief cannot last. Whatever rouses the moral nature,
   whether it be danger, or suffering, or the approach of death, banishes
   unbelief in a moment. Men pass from skepticism to faith, in many cases,
   instantaneously; not of course by a process of argument, but by the
   existence of a state of consciousness with which skepticism is
   irreconcilable, and in the presence of which it cannot exist. This fact
   is illustrated continually, not only in the case of the uneducated and
   superstitious, but even in the case of men of the highest culture. The
   simple fact of Scripture and experience is, that the moral law as
   written upon the heart is indelible; and the moral law in its nature
   implies a lawgiver, one from whom that law emanates, and by whom it
   will be enforced. And, therefore, so long as men are moral creatures,
   they will and must believe in the existence of a Being on whom they are
   dependent, and to whom they are responsible for their character and
   their conduct. To this extent, and in this sense, therefore, it is to
   be admitted that the knowledge of God is innate and intuitive; that men
   no more need to be taught that there is a God, than they need to be
   taught there is such a thing as sin. But as men are ignorant of the
   nature and extent of sin, while aware of its existence, until
   instructed by the Word of God, and enlightened by his Spirit; so they
   greatly need the same sources of instruction to give them any adequate
   knowledge of the nature of God, and of their relations to him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [130] De Natura Deorum, i. 17.

   [131] Testimonium Animæ.

   [132] Institutio, 1. iii. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   § 2. The Knowledge of God is not due to a Process of Reasoning.

   Those who are unwilling to admit that the idea of God is innate as
   given in the very constitution of man, generally hold that it is a
   necessary, or, at least, a natural deduction of reason. Sometimes it is
   represented as the last and highest generalization of science. As the
   law of gravitation is assumed to account for a large class of the
   phenomena of the universe, and as it not only does account for them,
   but must be assumed in order to understand them; so the existence of an
   intelligent first cause is assumed to account for the existence of the
   universe itself, and for all its phenomena. But as such generalizations
   are possible only for cultivated minds, this theory of the origin of
   the idea of God, cannot account for belief in his existence in the
   minds of all men, even the least educated.

   Others, therefore, while regarding this knowledge to be the result of a
   course of reasoning, make the process far more simple. There are many
   things which children and illiterate persons learn, and can hardly
   avoid learning, which need not be referred to the constitution of their
   nature. Thus the existence of God is so obviously manifested, by
   everything within and around us, the belief in that existence is so
   natural, so suited to what we see and what we need, that it comes to be
   generally adopted. We are surrounded by facts which indicate design; by
   effects which demand a cause. We have a sense of the infinite which is
   vague and void, until filled with God. We have a knowledge of ourselves
   as spiritual beings, which suggests the idea of God, who is a spirit.
   We have the consciousness of moral qualities, of the distinction
   between good and evil, and this makes us think of God as a being of
   moral perfections. All this may be very true, but it is not an adequate
   account of the facts of the case. It does not give a satisfactory
   reason for the universality and strength of the conviction of the
   existence of God. Our own consciousness teaches us that this is not the
   ground of our own faith. We do not thus reason ourselves into the
   belief that there is a God; and it is very obvious that it is not by
   such a process of ratiocination, simple as it is, that the mass of the
   people are brought to this conclusion.

   Moreover, the process above described does not account for the origin
   of our belief in God, but only gives the method by which that belief is
   confirmed and developed. Very little is given by intuition in any case,
   at least to ordinary minds. What is thus discovered needs to be
   expanded, and its real contents unfolded. If this be true with the
   intuitions of sense and of the understanding, why should it not be so
   of our religious nature?

   The truth is, that all the faculties and feelings of our minds and
   bodies have their appropriate objects; and the possession of the
   faculties supposes the existence of those objects. The senses suppose
   the existence and reality of the objects of sense. The eye, in its very
   structure, supposes that there is such an element as light; the sense
   of hearing would be unaccountable and inconceivable without sound; and
   the sense of touch would be inconceivable were there no tangible
   objects. The same is true of our social affections; they necessitate
   the assumption that there are relations suited to their exercises. Our
   moral nature supposes that the distinction between right and wrong is
   not chimerical or imaginary. In like manner, our religious feelings,
   our sense of dependence, our consciousness of responsibility, our
   aspirations after fellowship with some Being higher than ourselves, and
   higher than anything which the world or nature contains, necessitates
   the belief in the existence of God. It is indeed said that if this
   belief is intuitive and necessary, there is no virtue in it. This
   objection overlooks the fact that the moral character of our feelings
   depends on their nature and not on their origin. They may spring from
   the constitution of our nature, and yet be good or evil as the case may
   be. A mother's love for her child is instinctive; the absence of the
   maternal affection in a mother is something unnatural and monstrous,
   the object of universal condemnation. The sense of pity, of justice,
   the feelings of benevolence, are instinctive, but none the less
   virtuous. The same is true of our religious feelings, and of the belief
   which they involve. We cannot help feeling that we are responsible, and
   it is right that we should feel so. The man who has brought himself to
   a state of insensibility to all moral obligation, is what the
   Scriptures call a "reprobate." Adam believed in God the moment he was
   created, for the same reason that he believed in the external world.
   His religious nature, unclouded and undefiled, apprehended the one with
   the same confidence that his senses apprehended the other. It is of
   great importance that men should know and feel that they are by their
   very nature bound to believe in God; that they cannot emancipate
   themselves from that belief, without derationalizing and demoralizing
   their whole being.
     __________________________________________________________________

   § 3. Knowledge of God not due exclusively to Tradition.

   There are some theologians who are unable to believe that the knowledge
   of God can be referred either to the constitution of our nature, or to
   any process of reasoning. Not only the exalted view of the Divine Being
   presented in the Bible, but the simple and perverted apprehensions of
   his nature prevailing among the heathen, they say must be referred to
   an original supernatural revelation. Such a revelation was made to our
   first parents and from them passed over to their descendants. When the
   knowledge thus communicated began to die out among men, God again
   revealed himself to Abraham, and made him and his posterity the
   depositaries of the truth. Either, therefore, from the remains of the
   primitive revelation, or by radiation from the chosen people, all the
   knowledge of God existing in the world has been derived. The attempt is
   made to show that the more remote any people were from the Jews, the
   less did they know of God; and the more any nation enjoyed of
   intercourse with the people to whom God had committed his oracles, the
   more correct and extended was their knowledge.

   This view, although arising from reverence for the Word of God, is
   evidently extreme. It is true that the further we go back in the
   history of the world, the nearer we approach the primal revelation, the
   purer is the knowledge concerning Him. It may also be true, as a
   general rule, that the more any people were brought under the influence
   of the truth as held by the chosen people of God, the more enlightened
   they became. It may further be conceded that those who with the Bible
   in their hands reject its teachings, and give themselves up to their
   own speculations, turn, as the Apostle expresses it, "the truth of God
   into a lie," losing all knowledge of the living and true God. All this,
   however, does not prove that the knowledge of God is not written on the
   heart. Our intuitive perceptions need to be cherished, developed, and
   interpreted. We know from Scripture that the law is written in
   characters which cannot be obliterated, upon the souls of all men, and
   yet it has been perverted, misinterpreted, or disregarded by men in
   every age and in every part of the world.
     __________________________________________________________________

   § 4. Can the Existence of God be proved?

   A large class of theologians and philosophers deny that the existence
   of God is susceptible of proof. This is done on different grounds.

   First. It is said that the knowledge of God being intuitive, it is not
   a proper subject of proof. This is the position taken by that class of
   theologians who resolve all religion into feeling, and by the modern
   school of speculative philosophers, who make such a wide distinction

[EXCERPT B]
   § 3. The Teleological Argument.

   A. Its Nature.

   This argument also admits of being stated in a syllogistic form. Design
   supposes a designer. The world everywhere exhibits marks of design.
   Therefore the world owes its existence to an intelligent author.

   By design is intended, -- (1.) The selection of an end to be attained.
   (2.) The choice of suitable means for its attainment. (3.) The actual
   application of those means for the accomplishment of the proposed end.

   Such being the nature of design, it is a self-evident truth, or, even
   an identical proposition, that design is indicative of intelligence,
   will, and power. It is simply saying that intelligence in the effect
   implies intelligence in the cause.

   It is moreover true that the intelligence indicated by design is not in
   the thing designed. It must be in an external agent. The mind indicated
   in a book is not in the book itself, but in the author and printer. The
   intelligence revealed by a calculating machine, or any similar work of
   art, is not in the material employed, but in the inventor and artist.
   Neither is the mind indicated in the structure of the bodies of plants
   and animals, in them, but in Him who made them. And in like manner the
   mind indicated in the world at large must be in an extramundane Being.
   There is, indeed, this obvious difference between the works of God and
   the works of man. In every product of human art dead materials are
   fashioned and united to accomplish a given end; but the organized works
   of nature are animated by a living principle. They are fashioned as it
   were from within outward. In other words, they grow; they are not
   constructed. In this respect there is a great difference between a
   house and a tree or the human body. But, nevertheless, in both cases,
   the mind is external to the thing produced; because the end, the
   thought, is prior to the product. As the thought or idea of a machine
   must be in the mind of the mechanist, before the machine is made; so
   the idea or thought of the eye must be anterior to its formation. "It
   is a simple and pregnant conclusion," says Trendelenburg, [153] "that
   so far as design is realized in the world, thought as its ground has
   preceded it." And this thought, he goes on to say, is not dead, as a
   figure or model, it is connected with will and power. It is, therefore,
   in the mind of a person who has the ability and purpose to carry it
   out. He further says, "tiefsinnige Zweckmässigkeit bewustlos und
   blind," cannot be imagined, i.e., a blind and unconscious adaptation of
   means to an end is inconceivable.

   As the conviction that design implies an intelligent agent is intuitive
   and necessary, it is not limited to the narrow sphere of our
   experience. The argument is not, Every house, ship, telescope, or other
   instrument or machine, we ever saw had an intelligent maker, therefore
   we may take it for granted that any similar work of art was not formed
   by chance or by the operation of blind, unconscious forces. The
   argument rather is, Such is the nature of design, that it of necessity
   implies an intelligent agent; and, therefore, where ever, or whenever
   we see evidence of design we are convinced that it is to be referred to
   the operation of mind. On this ground we not only authorized, but
   compelled to apply the argument from design far beyond the limits of
   experience, and to say: It is just as evident that the world had an
   intelligent creator, as that a book had an author. If a man can believe
   that a book was written by chance, or by blind, unconscious force,
   then, and not otherwise, can he rationally deny the validity of the
   argument from design in proof of the existence of a personal God.

   B. Evidences of Design in the World.

   This is a boundless subject. One of the most important and valuable of
   the "Bridgewater Treatises," the volume by Dr. Charles Bell, is devoted
   to "The Hand, its mechanism and vital endowments as evincing design."
   Hundreds of volumes would not be sufficient to exhibit the evidence of
   the intelligent adaptation of means to an end, which the world
   everywhere affords. In the few pages now at command all that can be
   attempted, is an indication of the nature of this evidence. [154]

   Design in Single Organs.

   1. No work of human art can compare with the nicety and completeness of
   the separate organs of organized bodies for the purpose for which they
   are designed. In the eye, for example, there is the most perfect
   optical instrument constructed in accordance with the hidden laws of
   light. We find there the only nerve in the body susceptible of the
   impressions of light and color. That nerve is spread out on the retina.
   The light is admitted through an orifice in the ball, which opening by
   the most delicate arrangement of muscles is enlarged or contracted,
   according to the degree of light which falls on the retina, which
   enlargement or contraction is not dependent on the will, but on the
   stimulus of the light itself. Light, however, merely passing through an
   orifice would make no image of the object from which it was reflected.
   It is, therefore, made to pass through lenses perfect in form so to
   refract the rays as to bring them to a proper focus on the retina. If
   the inner chamber of the eye were white, it would so reflect the rays
   entering the pupil at every angle as to render vision impossible. That
   chamber, and that alone, is lined with a black pigment. By a delicate
   muscular arrangement the eye is enabled to adapt itself to the distance
   of external objects so that the proper focus may be preserved. These
   are a small part of the wonders exhibited by this single organ of the
   body. This organ was fashioned in th darkness of the womb, with a
   self-evident reference to the nature and properties of light, of which
   the creature for whose use it was fashioned had neither knowledge or
   experience. If the eye, therefore, does not indicate the intelligent
   adaptation of means to an end, no such adaptation can be found in any
   work of human ingenuity.

[EXCERPT C]
  THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD

   Having considered the arguments in favor of the doctrine that God is,
   and also the various systems opposed to Theism, we come now to consider
   the question, Can God be known? and if so, How? that is, How does the
   mind proceed in forming its idea of God, and, How do we know that God
   really is what we believe Him to be?
     __________________________________________________________________

   § 1. God can be known.

   It is the clear doctrine of the Scriptures that God can be known. Our
   Lord teaches that eternal life consists in the knowledge of God and of
   Jesus Christ, whom He hath sent. The Psalmist says, "In Judah is God
   known" (Ps. lxxvi. 1). Isaiah predicts, that "the earth shall be full
   of the knowledge of the Lord" (Is. xi. 9). Paul says even of the
   heathen, that they knew God, but did not like to retain that knowledge
   (Rom. i. 19, 20, 21, 28).

   A. State of the Question.

   It is, however, important distinctly to understand what is meant when
   it is said, God can be known.

   1. This does not mean that we can know all that is true concerning God.
   There were some among the ancient philosophers who taught that the
   nature of God can be as fully understood and determined as any other
   object of knowledge. The modern speculative school teaches the same
   doctrine. Among the propositions laid down by Spinoza, we find the
   following: "Cognitio æternæ et infinitæ essentiæ Dei, quam unaquæque
   idea involvit, est adæquata et perfecta." [325] Hegel says, that God
   is, only so far as He is known. The sin against the Holy Ghost,
   according to Hegel, is to deny that He can be known. [326] Cousin holds
   the same doctrine. "God in fact," he says, "exists to us only in so far
   as He is known." [327]

   According to Schelling, God is known in his own nature by direct
   intuition of the higher reason. He assumes that there is in man a power
   which transcends the limits of the ordinary consciousness (an
   Anschauungs Vermögen), which takes immediate cognizance of the
   Infinite. Hegel says that "Man knows God only so far as God knows
   Himself in man; this knowledge is God's self-consciousness, but
   likewise a knowledge of the same by man, and this knowledge of God by
   man is the knowledge of man by God." [328] Cousin finds this knowledge
   in the common consciousness of men. That consciousness includes the
   knowledge of the Infinite as well as of the finite. We know the one
   just as we know the other, and we cannot know the one without knowing
   the other. These philosophers all admit that we could not thus know God
   unless we were ourselves God. Self-knowledge, with them, is the
   knowledge of God. Reason in man, according to Cousin, does not belong
   to his individuality. It is infinite, impersonal, and divine. Our
   knowledge of God, therefore, is only God knowing Himself. Of course it
   is in no such sense as this that the Scriptures and the Church teach
   that God can be known.

   God Inconceivable.

   2. It is not held that God, properly speaking, can be conceived of;
   that is, we cannot form a mental image of God. "All conception," says
   Mr. Mansel, [329] "implies imagination." To have a valid conception of
   a horse, he adds, we must be able "to combine" the attributes which
   form "the definition of the animal" into "a representative image."
   Conception is defined by Taylor in the same manner, as "the forming or
   bringing an image or idea into the mind by an effort of the will." In
   this sense of the word it must be admitted that the Infinite is not an
   object of knowledge. We cannot form an image of infinite space, or of
   infinite duration, or of an infinite whole. To form an image is to
   limit, to circumscribe. But the infinite is that which is incapable of
   limitation. It is admitted, therefore, that the infinite God is
   inconceivable. We can form no representative image of Him in our minds.
   The word, however, is often, and perhaps commonly, used in a less
   restricted sense. To conceive is to think. A conception is therefore a
   thought and not necessarily an image. To say, therefore, that God is
   conceivable, in common language, is merely to say that He is thinkable.
   That is, that the thought (or idea) of God involves no contradiction or
   impossibility. We cannot think of a round square, or that a part is
   equal to the whole. But we can think that God is infinite and eternal.

   God Incomprehensible.

   3. When it is said that God can be known, it is not meant that He can
   be comprehended. To comprehend is to have a complete and exhaustive
   knowledge of an object. It is to understand its nature and its
   relations. We cannot comprehend force, and specially vital force. We
   see its effect, but we cannot understand its nature or the mode in
   which it acts. It would be strange that we should know more of God than
   of ourselves, or of the most familiar objects of sense. God is past
   finding out. We cannot understand the Almighty unto perfection. To
   comprehend is (1.) To know the essence as well as the attributes of an
   object. (2.) It is to know not some only, but all of its attributes.
   (3.) To know the relation in which these attributes stand to each other
   and to the substance to which they belong. (4.) To know the relation in
   which the object known stands to all other objects. Such knowledge is
   clearly impossible in a creature, either of itself or of anything out
   of itself. It is, however, substantially thus that the
   transcendentalists claim to know God.

   Our Knowledge of God Partial.

   4. It is included in what has been said, that our knowledge of God is
   partial and inadequate. There is infinitely more in God than we have
   any idea of; and what we do know, we know imperfectly. We know that God
   knows; but there is much in his mode of knowing, and in its relation to
   its objects, which we cannot understand. We know that He acts; but we
   do not know how He acts, or the relation which his activity bears to
   time, or things out of Himself. We know that He feels; that He loves,
   pities, is merciful, is gracious; that He hates sin. But this emotional
   element of the divine nature is covered with an obscurity as great, but
   no greater, than that which rests over his thoughts or purposes. Here
   again our ignorance, or rather, the limitation of our knowledge
   concerning God, finds a parallel in our ignorance of ourself. There are
   potentialities in our nature of which, in our present state of
   existence, we have no idea. And even as to what we are now, we know but
   little. We know that we perceive, think, and act; we do not know how.
   It is perfectly inscrutable to us how the mind takes cognizance of
   matter; how the soul acts on the body, or the body on the mind. But
   because our knowledge of ourselves is thus partial and imperfect, no
   sane man would assert that we have no self-knowledge.

   The common doctrine on this subject is clearly expressed by Des Cartes:
   [330] "Sciri potest, Deum esse infinitum et omnipotentem, quanquam
   anima nostra, utpote finita, id nequeat comprehendere sive concipere;
   eodem nimirum modo, quo montem manibus tangere possumus, sed non ut
   arborem, aut aliam quampiam rem brachiis nostris non majorem amplecti:
   comprehendere enim est cogitatione complecti; ad hoc autem, ut sciamus
   aliquid, sufficit, ut illud cogitatione attingamus."

   Even Spinoza [331] says: "Ad quæstionem tuam, an de Deo tam claram,
   quam de triangulo habeam ideam, respondeo affirmando. Non dico, me Deum
   omnino cognoscere; sed me quædam ejus attributa, non autem omnia, neque
   maximam intelligere partem, et certum est, plurimorum ignorantiam,
   quorundam eorum habere notitiam, non impedire. Quum Euclidis elementa
   addiscerem, primo tres trianguli angulos duobus rectis æquari
   intelligebam; hancque trianguli proprietatem clare percipiebam, licet
   multarum aliarum ignarus essem."

   While, therefore, it is admitted not only that the infinite God is
   incomprehensible, and that our knowledge of Him is both partial and
   imperfect; that there is much in God which we do not know at all, and
   that what we do know, we know very imperfectly; nevertheless our
   knowledge, as far as it goes, is true knowledge. God really is what we
   believe Him to be, so far as our idea of Him is determined by the
   revelation which He has made of Himself in his works, in the
   constitution of our nature, in his word, and in the person of his Son.
   To know is simply to have such apprehensions of an object as conform to
   what that object really is. We know what the word Spirit means. We know
   what the words infinite, eternal, and immutable, mean. And, therefore,
   the sublime proposition, pregnant with more truth than was ever
   compressed in any other sentence, "God is a Spirit, infinite, eternal,
   and immutable," conveys to the mind as distinct an idea, and as true
   (i.e., trustworthy) knowledge, as the proposition "The human soul is a
   finite spirit." In this sense God is an object of knowledge. He is not
   the unknown God, because He is infinite. Knowledge in Him does not
   cease to be knowledge because it is omniscience; power does not cease
   to be power because it is omnipotence; any more than space ceases to be
   space because it is infinite.

   B. How do we know God?

   How does the mind proceed in forming its idea of God? The older
   theologians answered this question by saying that it is by the way of
   negation, by the way of eminence, and by the way of causality. That is,
   we deny to God any limitation; we ascribe to Him every excellence in
   the highest degree; and we refer to Him as the great First Cause every
   attribute manifested in his works. We are the children of God, and,
   therefore, we are like Him. We are, therefore, authorized to ascribe to
   Him all the attributes of our own nature as rational creatures, without
   limitation, and to an infinite degree. If we are like God, God is like
   us. This is the fundamental principle of all religion. This is the
   principle which Paul assumed in his address to the Athenians (Acts
   xvii. 29): "Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not
   to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone,
   graven by art and man's device." For the same reason we ought not to
   think that He is simple being, or a mere abstraction, a name for the
   moral order of the universe, or the unknown and unknowable cause of all
   things, -- mere inscrutable force. If we are his children, He is our
   Father, whose image we bear, and of whose nature we partake. This, in
   the proper sense of the word, is Anthropomorphism, a word much abused,
   and often used in a bad sense to express the idea that God is
   altogether such a one as ourselves, a being of like limitations and
   passions. In the sense, however, just explained, it expresses the
   doctrine of the Church and of the great mass of mankind. Jacobi [332]
   well says: "We confess, therefore, to an Anthropomorphism inseparable
   from the conviction that man bears the image of God; and maintain that
   besides this Anthropomorphism, which has always been called Theism, is
   nothing but atheism or fetichism."

   C. Proof that this Method is Trustworthy.

   That this method of forming an idea of God is trustworthy, is proved,
   --

   1. Because it is a law of nature. Even in the lowest form of fetichism
   the life of the worshipper is assumed to belong to the object which he
   worships. The power dreaded is assumed to possess attributes like our
   own. In like manner under all the forms of polytheism, the gods of the
   people have been intelligent personal agents. It is only in the schools
   of philosophy that we find a different method of forming an idea of the
   Godhead. They have substituted to hon for ho on, to theion for ho
   Theos, to agathon for ho agathos. It is here as with regard to the
   knowledge of the external world. The mass of mankind believe that
   things are what they perceive them to be. This philosophers deny. They
   affirm that we do not perceive the things themselves, but certain
   ideas, species, or images of the things; that we have, and can have, no
   knowledge of what the things themselves really are. So they say we can
   have no knowledge of what God is; we only know that we are led to think
   of Him in a certain way, but we are not only not authorized to believe
   that our idea corresponds to the reality, but, say they, it is certain
   that God is not what we take Him to be. As the people are right in the
   one case, so are they in the other. In other words, our conviction that
   God is what He has revealed Himself to be, rests on the same foundation
   as our conviction that the external world is what we take it to be.
   That foundation is the veracity of consciousness, or the
   trustworthiness of the laws of belief which God has impressed upon our
   nature. "Invincibility of belief," according to Sir William Hamilton,
   "is convertible with the truth of belief," [333] although, unhappily,
   on this subject, he did not adhere to his own principle, "That what is
   by nature necessarily believed to be, truly is." [334] No man has more
   nobly or more earnestly vindicated this doctrine, which is the
   foundation of all science and of all faith. "Consciousness," he says,
   "once convicted of falsehood, an unconditioned scepticism, in regard to
   the character of our intellectual being, is the melancholy but only
   rational result. Any conclusion may now with impunity be drawn against
   the hopes and the dignity of human nature. Our personality, our
   immateriality, our moral liberty, have no longer an argument for their
   defence. Man is the dream of a shadow.' God is the dream of that
   dream." [335] The only question, therefore, is, Are we invincibly led
   to think of God as possessing the attributes of our rational nature?
   This cannot be denied; for universality proves invincibility of belief.
   And it is a historical fact that men have universally thus thought of
   God. Even Mr. Mansel [336] exclaims against the transcendentalists,
   "Fools, to dream that man can escape from himself, that human reason
   can draw aught but a human portrait of God." True, he denies the
   correctness of that portrait; or, at least, he asserts that we cannot
   know whether it is correct or not. But this is not now the question. He
   admits that we are forced by the constitution of our nature thus to
   think of God. And by the fundamental principle of all true philosophy,
   what we are forced to believe must be true. It is true, therefore, that
   God really is what we take Him to be, when we ascribe to Him the
   perfections of our own nature, without limitation, and to an infinite
   degree.

   Our Moral Nature demands this Idea of God.

   2. It has already been shown, when speaking of the moral argument for
   the existence of God, that all men are conscious of their
   accountability to a being superior to themselves, who knows what they
   are and what they do, and who has the will and purpose to reward or
   punish men according to their works. The God, therefore, who is
   revealed to us in our nature, is a God who knows, and wills, and acts;
   who rewards and punishes. That is, He is a person; an intelligent,
   voluntary agent, endowed with moral attributes. This revelation of God
   must be true. It must make known to us what God really is, or our
   nature is a lie. All this Mr. Mansel, who holds that God can not be
   known, admits. He admits that a sense of dependence on a superior power
   is "a fact of the inner consciousness;" that this superior power is
   "not an inexorable fate, or immutable law, but a Being having at least
   so far the attributes of personality, that He can show favour or
   severity to those dependent upon Him, and can be regarded by them with
   the feelings of hope, and fear, and reverence, and gratitude." [337] No
   man, however, is, or can be grateful to the sun, or to the atmosphere,
   or to unintelligent force. Gratitude is a tribute of a person to a
   person. Again, the same author admits that "the moral reason, or will,
   or conscience of man, call it by what name we please, can have no
   authority save as implanted in him by some higher spiritual Being, as a
   law emanating from a law-giver." [338] "We are thus compelled," he
   says, "by the consciousness of moral obligation, to assume the
   existence of a moral [and of course of a personal] Deity, and to regard
   the absolute standard of right and wrong as constituted by the nature
   of that Deity." [339] Our argument from these facts is, that if our
   moral nature compels us to believe that God is a person, He must be a
   person, and consequently that we arrive at a true knowledge of God by
   attributing to Him the perfections of our own nature.

   Our Religious Nature makes the same Demand.

   3. The argument from our religious, as distinct from our moral nature,
   is essentially the same. Morality is not all of religion. The one is as
   much a law and necessity of our nature as the other. To worship, in the
   religious sense of the word, is to ascribe infinite perfection to its
   object. It is to express to that object out acknowledgments for the
   blessings we enjoy, and to seek their continuance; it is to confess,
   and praise, and pray, and to adore. We cannot worship the law of
   gravity, or unconscious force, or the mere order of the universe. Our
   religious nature, in demanding an object of supreme reverence, love,
   and confidence, demands a personal God, a God clothed with the
   attributes of a nature like our own; who can hear our confessions,
   praises, and prayers; who can love, and be loved; who can supply our
   wants, and fill all our capacities for good. Thus again it appears that
   unless our whole nature is a contradiction and a falsehood, we arrive
   at a true knowledge of God when we ascribe to Him the perfections of
   our own nature.

   Mr. Mansel admits that our nature does demand a personal and moral
   Deity; but, he says, "the very conception of a moral nature is in
   itself the conception of a limit, for morality is the compliance with a
   law; and a law, whether imposed from within or from without, can only
   be conceived to operate by limiting the range of possible actions."
   [340] In like manner he says, "The only human conception of personality
   is that of limitation." Therefore, if God be infinite, he can neither
   be a person, nor possess moral attributes. This is the argument of
   Strauss, and of all other pantheists, against the doctrine of a
   personal God. Mr. Mansel admits the force of the argument, and says we
   must renounce all hope of knowing what God is, and be content with
   "regulative knowledge," which teaches not what God really is, but what
   He wills us to think Him to be. We are thus forbidden to trust to our
   necessary beliefs. We must not regard as true what God by the
   constitution of our nature forces us to believe. This is to subvert all
   philosophy and all religion, and to destroy the difference between the
   rational and the irrational. Why is this contradiction between reason
   and conscience, between our rational and moral nature, assumed to
   exist? Simply because philosophers choose to give such a definition of
   morality and personality that neither can be predicated of an infinite
   Being. It is not true that either morality or personality imply any
   limitation inconsistent with absolute perfection. We do not limit God
   when we say He cannot be irrational as well as rational, unconscious as
   well as conscious, finite as well as infinite, evil as well as good.
   The only limitation admitted is the negation of imperfection. Reason is
   not limited when we say it cannot be unreason; or spirit, when we say
   that it is not matter; or light, when we say it is not darkness; or
   space, when we say it is not time. We do not, therefore, limit the
   Infinite, when we exalt Him in our conceptions from the unconscious to
   the conscious, from the unintelligent to the intelligent, from an
   impersonal something to the absolutely perfect personal Jehovah. All
   these difficulties arise from confounding the ideas of infinite and
   all.

   4. The fourth argument on this subject is, that if we are not justified
   in referring to God the attributes of our own nature, then we have no
   God. The only alternative is anthropomorphism (in this sense) or
   Atheism. An unknown God, a God of whose nature and of whose relation to
   us we know nothing, to us is nothing. It is a historical fact that
   those who reject this method of forming our idea of God, who deny that
   we are to refer to Him the perfections of our own nature, have become
   atheists. They take the word "spirit," and strip from it consciousness,
   intelligence, will, and morality; and the residue, which is blank
   nothing, they call God. Hamilton and Mansel take refuge from this
   dreadful conclusion in faith. They say that reason forbids the
   ascription of these, or of any other attributes, to the Infinite and
   Absolute, but that faith protests against this conclusion of the
   reason. Such protest, however, is of no account, unless it be rational.
   When Kant proved that there was no rational evidence of the existence
   of God, and fell back from the speculative to the practical reason
   (i.e., from reason to faith), his followers universally gave up all
   faith in a personal God. No man can believe in the impossible. And if
   reason pronounces that it is impossible that the Infinite should be a
   person, faith in His personality is an impossibility. This Mr. Mansel
   does not admit. For while he says that it is a contradiction to affirm
   the Infinite to be a person, or to possess moral attributes, he
   nevertheless says that, "Anthropomorphism is the indispensable
   condition of all human theology;" [341] and he quotes from Kant [342]
   this passage: "We may confidently challenge all natural theology to
   name a single distinctive attribute of the Deity, whether denoting
   intelligence or will, which, apart from anthropomorphism, is anything
   more than a mere word, to which not the slightest notion can be
   attached, which can serve to extend our theoretical knowledge." It is
   greatly to be lamented that men should teach that the only way in which
   it is possible for us to form an idea of God, leads to no true
   knowledge. It does not teach us what God is, but what we are forced
   against reason to think He is.

   Argument from the Revelation of God in Nature.

   5. A fifth argument is from the fact that the works of God manifest a
   nature like our own. It is a sound principle that we must refer to a
   cause the attributes necessary to account for its effects. If the
   effects manifest intelligence, will, power, and moral excellence, these
   attributes must belong to the cause. As, therefore, the works of God
   are a revelation of all these attributes on a most stupendous scale,
   they must belong to God in an infinite degree. This is only saying that
   the revelation made of God in the external world agrees with the
   revelation which He has made of himself in the constitution of our own
   nature. In other words, it proves that the image of himself which He
   has enstamped on our nature is a true likeness.

   Argument from Scripture.

   6. The Scriptures declare God to be just what we are led to think He
   is, when we ascribe to Him the perfections of our own nature in an
   infinite degree. We are self-conscious, so is God. We are spirits, so
   is He. We are voluntary agents, so is God. We have a moral nature,
   miserably defaced indeed, God has moral excellence in infinite
   perfection. We are persons, so is God. All this the Scriptures declare
   to be true. The great primal revelation of God is as the "I am," the
   personal God. All the names and titles given to Him; all the attributes
   ascribed to Him; all the works attributed to Him, are revelations of
   what He truly is. He is the Elohim, the Mighty One, the Holy One, the
   Omnipresent Spirit; He is the creator, the preserver, the governor of
   all things. He is our Father. He is the hearer of prayer; the giver of
   all good. He feeds the young ravens. He clothes the flowers of the
   field. He is Love. He so loved the world as to give his only begotten
   Son, that whosoever believeth on Him might not perish but have
   everlasting life. He is merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness
   and truth. He is a present help in every time of need; a refuge, a high
   tower, an exceeding great reward. The relations in which, according to
   the Scriptures, we stand to God, are such as we can sustain only to a
   being who is like ourselves. He is our ruler, and father, with whom we
   can commune. His favour is our life, his loving-kindness better than
   life. This sublime revelation of God in his own nature and in his
   relation to us is not a delusion. It is not mere regulative truth, or
   it would be a deceit and mockery. It makes God known to us as He really
   is. We therefore know God, although no creature can understand the
   Almighty unto perfection.

   Argument from the Manifestation of God in Christ.

   7. Finally, God has revealed Himself in the person of his Son. No man
   knoweth the Father but the Son; and he to whom the Son shall reveal
   Him. Jesus Christ is the true God. The revelation which He made of
   Himself was the manifestation of God. He and the Father are one. The
   words of Christ were the words of God. The works of Christ were the
   works of God. The love, mercy, tenderness, the forgiving grace, as well
   as the holiness, the severity and power manifested by Christ, were all
   manifestations of what God truly is. We see, therefore, as with our own
   eyes, what God is. We know that although infinite and absolute, He can
   think, act, and will; that He can love and hate; that He can hear
   prayer and forgive sins, that we can have fellowship with Him, as one
   person can commune with another. Philosophy must veil her face in the
   presence of Jesus Christ, as God manifest in the flesh. She may not
   presume in that presence to say that God is not, and is not known to
   be, what Christ himself most clearly was. This doctrine that God is the
   object of certain and true knowledge lies at the foundation of all
   religion, and therefore must never be given up.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [325] Ethices, ii. prop. xlvi. edit. Jena, 1803, vol. ii. p. 119.

   [326] See Mansel's Limits of Religious Thought, Boston, 1859, p. 301.

   [327] Sir William Hamilton's Discussions, p. 16. Princeton Review on
   Cousin's Philosophy, 1856.

   [328] Werke, xii. p. 496, edit. Berlin, 1840.

   [329] Prolegomena Logica, edit. Boston, 1860, p. 34.

   [330] Epistolæ, I., cx., edit. Amsterdam, 1682.

   [331] Epistola, lx., vol. i. p. 659, edit. Jena, 1802.

   [332] "Von den göttlichen Dingen," Werke, iii. pp. 422, 423, edit.
   Leipzig, 1816.

   [333] Philosophy, edit. Wight, New York, 1854, p. 233.

   [334] Ibid. p. 226.

   [335] Ibid. p. 234.

   [336] Limits of Religious Thought, edit. Boston, 1859, pp. 56, 57.

   [337] Limits of Religious Thought, etc., p. 120.

   [338] Ibid. p. 121.

   [339] Ibid. p. 122.

   [340] Limits of Religious Thought, etc., p. 127.

   [341] Limits of Religious Thought, etc., p. 261.

   [342] "Kritik der Praktischen Vernunft." Works, edit. Rosenkranz, vol.
   viii. p. 282.
     __________________________________________________________________
