Excerpt capture for reference 202610061546.
William Sanday and Arthur C. Headlam, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on
the Epistle to the Romans, International Critical Commentary, 10th ed. (New
York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1905) -- the title page of this scan reads
"TENTH EDITION" and "CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 1905". Public domain (published
1905; both authors died before 1956).
Source: the Internet Archive item criticalexegetic00sandrich
(https://archive.org/details/criticalexegetic00sandrich), its full-text OCR
file criticalexegetic00sandrich_djvu.txt, fetched 2026-10-06T15:42:43Z via
curl through the session's egress proxy (1,868,618 bytes).
Extent: the OCR text from the section heading "THE FALL OF ADAM AND THE WORK
OF CHRIST" (p. 130, foot) to the end of the excursus "The Effects of Adam's
Fall in Jewish Theology" (p. 138, the sentence ending "he must stand or
fall"), i.e. the summary of Rom 5:12-14, the verse notes on 5:12, 5:13 and
5:14, and the excursus. Lines 15359-15803 of the OCR file, copied
byte for byte: the OCR's own errors (e.g. "WORE" for WORK, "Fewish" for
Jewish, "6" and "@" for the Greek relative ᾧ in places, running heads and
page numbers inside the text, garbled Latin in the 4 Ezra quotations) are
NOT corrected, because this is a record of what the scan says. Notes citing
this capture must quote around OCR damage, never silently repair it. Pages
before 130 and after 138 are not captured.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- BEGIN VERBATIM (OCR, pp. 130-138) ---
THE FALL OF ADAM AND THE WORE OF CHRIST. 


V. 12-14. What a contrast does this last description 
suggest between the Fall of Adam and the justifying Work 
of Christ! There is indeed parallelism as well as contrast. 
Fer it is true that as Christ brought righteousness and life, 
so Adam's Fall brought sin and death. If death prevailed 
throughout the bre-Mosatc period, that could not be due solely 


V. 12-14.) ADAM AND CHRIST 131 


to the act of i\wse who died. Death is the punishment of 
sin; but they hud not sinned against law as Adam had. 
The true cause then was not their own sin, but Adam's ; 
whose fall thus had consequences extending beyond itself, like 
the redeeming act of Christ. 


13 The description just gien of the Work of Christ, first justifying 
and reconciling the sinner, aad then holding out to him the hope 
of final salvation, brings out forcibly the contrast between the 
two great Representatives of 1}umanity—Adam and Christ. The 
act by which Adam fell, like the act of Christ, had a far-reaching 
effect upon mankind. Through his Fall, Sin, as an active principle, 
first gained an entrance among the human race; and Sin brought 
with it the doom of (physical) Death. So that, through Adam’s 
Fall, death pervaded the whole body of his descendants, because 
they one and all fell into sin, and died as he had died. When 
I say ‘they sinned’ I must insert a word of qualification. In the 
strict sense of full responsibility, they could not sin: for that 
attaches only to sin against law, and they had as yet no law to 
sin against. ™Yet they suffered the full penalty of sin. All 
through the long period which intervened between Adam and the 
Mosaic legislation, the tyrant Death held sway; even though 
those who died had not sinned, as Adam had, in violation of 
an express command. This proved that something deeper was 
at work: and that could only be the transmitted effect of Adam’s 
sin. It is this transmitted effect of a single act which made Adam 
a type of the coming Messiah. 


12. διὰ τοῦτο: points to the logical connexion with what pre- 
cedes. It has been argued, at somewhat disproportionate length, 
whether this refers to ver. 11 only (Fricke, De A/ente dogmatica loct 
Paulint ad Rom. v. 12 sq., Lipsiae, 1880, Mey., Philippi, Beet), or 
to vv. 9-11 (Fri.), or to vv. 1-11 (Rothe, Hofmann), or to the 
whole discussion from i. 17 onwards (Beng., Schott, Reiche, 
Riickert). We cannot lay down so precisely how much was 
consciously present to the mind of the Apostle. But as the lead- 
ing idea of the whole section is the comparison of the train of 
consequences flowing from the Fall of Adam with the train of 
consequences flowing from the Justifying Act of Christ, it seems 
natural to include at least as much as contains a brief outline of 
that work, i.e. as far as vv. I-11. 


Ξ 3 


132 EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS [ν. 12. 


That being so, we cannot with Fricke infer from ver. 11 that 
St. Paul only wishes to compare the result of death in the one 
case with that of 7 in the other. Fricke, however, is right in 
saying that his object is not to inquire into the origin of death 
or sin. The origin of both is assumed, not propounded as 
anything new. ‘This is important for the understanding of the 
bearings of the passage. All turns on this, that the effects of 
Adam’s Fall were transmitted to his descendants; but St. Paul 
nowhere says how they were transmitted; nor does he even define 
in precise terms wha is transmitted. He seems, however, to mean 
(1) the liability to sin, (2) the liability to die as the punishment 
of sin, 

ὥσπερ. The structure of the paragraph introduced by this 
word (to the end of ver. 14) is broken in a manner very character- 
istic of St. Paul. He begins the sentence as if he intended it to 
Tun: ὥσπερ δι ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου ἡ ἁμαρτία εἰς τὸν κόσμον εἰσῆλθε, καὶ διὰ 
τῆς ἁμαρτίας ὁ θάνατος . . . οὕτω καὶ δι’ ἑνὸς ἀνθρώπου ἡ δικαιοσύνη 
εἰσῆλθε, καὶ διὰ τῆς δικαιοσύνης ἡ Con. But the words διὰ τῆς ἅμαρ- 
τίας ὁ θάνατος bring up the subject which St. Paul is intending to 
raise, viz. the connexion of sin and death with the Fall of Adam: 
he goes off upon this, and when he has discussed it sufficiently 
for his purpose, he does not return to the form of sentence 
which he had originally planned, but he attaches the clause 
comparing Christ to Adam by a relative (és ἐστι τύπος τοῦ μέλλοντος) 
to the end of his digression: and so what should have been the 
main apodosis of the whole paragraph becomes merely sub- 
ordinate. It is a want of finish in style due to eagerness and 
intensity of thought; but the meaning is quite clear. Compare 
the construction of ii. 16; iii. 8, 26. 

ἡ ἁμαρτία: Sin, as so often, is personified: it is a malignant 
force let loose among mankind: see the fuller note at the end of 
the chapter. 

εἰς τὸν κόσμον εἰσῆλθε: a phrase which, though it reminds us 
specially of St. John (John i. 9, 10; ili. 17, 19; vi. 14; ix. 5, 
39; x. 36, &c.), is not peculiar to him (cf. 1 Tim, i. 15; Heb. 
x. 5). St. John and the author of Heb. apply it to the personal 
incarnation of the Logos; here it is applied to the impersonal 
self-diffusion of evil. 

ὁ θάνατος. Some have taken this to mean ‘eternal death,’ 
chiefly on the ground of wv. 17, 21, where it seems to be opposed 
to ‘eternal life.’ Oltr. is the most strenuous supporter of this 
view. But it is far simpler and better to take it of ‘physical 
death’: because (1) this is clearly the sense of ver. 14; (2) it is 
the sense of Gen. ii. 17; iii. 19; to which St. Paul is evidently 
alluding. It seems probable that even in vv. 17, 21, the idea 
is in the first instance physical. But St. Paul does not draw the 


V. 12.) ADAM AND CHRIST 133 


marked distinction that we do between this life and the life to 
come. The mention of death in any sense is enough to suggest 
the contrast of life in all its senses. The Apostle’s argument 
is that the gift of life and the benefits wrought by Christ are 
altogether wider in their range than the penalty of Adam’s sin; 
ὑπερεπερίσσευσεν ἥ χάρις is the keynote of the passage. It is not 
necessary that the two sides, of the antith sis should exactly cor- 
respond. In each particular the scale weighs heavily in favour 
of the Christian. 


The Western text (D E F G, &c.) omits this word altogether. Aug. 
makes the subject of the vb. not death but sin: he accuses the Pelagians 
of inserting (the second) 6 θάνατος. 


διῆλθεν: contains the force of distribution; ‘made its way to 
each individual member of the race’: καθάπερ τις κλῆρος πατρὸς 
διαβὰς ἐπὶ τοὺς ἐγγόνους (‘like a father’s inheritance divided among 
his children’), Euthym.-Zig. 

ἐφ᾽ 6. Though this expression has been much fought over, 
there can now be little doubt that the true rendering is ‘ because.’ 
(1) Orig. followed by the Latin commentators Aug. and Ambrstr. 
took the rel. as masc. with antecedent ᾿Αδάμ: ‘in whom,’ i.e. ‘in 
Adam.’ But in that case (i) ἐπέ would not be the right preposi- 
tion; (ii) @ would be too far removed from its antecedent. 
(2) Some Greeks quoted by Photius also took the rel. as masc. 
with antecedent θάνατος : ‘in which,’ i.e. ‘in death,’ which is 
even more impossible. (3) Some moderns, taking 6 as neut. and 
the whole phrase as equivalent to a conjunction, have tried to 
get out of it other meanings than ‘because.’ So (i) ‘in like 
manner as’ (‘all died, just as all sinned’), Rothe, De Wette; 
(ii) (= ἐφ᾽ ὅσον) ‘in proportion as,’ ‘in so far as’ (‘all died, 2” so 
far as all sinned’), Ewald, Tholuck (ed. 1856) and others. But 
the Greek will not bear either of these senses. (4) @ is rightly 
taken as neut., and the phrase ἐφ᾽ ᾧ as conj.=‘because’ (‘for 
that’ AV. and RV.) by Theodrt. Phot. Euthym,-Zig. and the mass 
of modern commentators. This is in agreement with Greek 
usage and is alone satisfactory. 


ἐφ᾽ @ in classical writers more often means ‘on condition that’: cf. 
Thuc. i. 113 σπονδὰς ποιησάμενοι ἐφ᾽ ᾧ τοὺς ἄνδρας κομιοῦνται, ‘on con- 
dition of getting back their prisoners,’ &c. The plural ἐφ᾽ οἷς is more 
common, as in ἀνθ’ ὧν, ἐξ ὧν, δι’ ὧν. In N.T. the phrase occurs three 
times, always as it would seem=fropterea guod, ‘because’: cf. 2 Cor. v. 4 
στενάζομεν βαρούμενοι: ἐφ᾽ ᾧ οὐ θέλομεν ἐκδύσασθαι x«.7.r.; Phil. iii, 12 
ἐφ᾽ ᾧ καὶ κατελήφθην ὑπὸ Χ, Ἰ. (where ‘seeing that’ or ‘because’ appears 
to be the more pro 8 0]6 rendering). So Phavorinus (d. 1537; a lexico- 
grapher of the Renaissance period, who incorporated the contents of older 
works, but here seems to be inventing his examples) ἐφ᾽ ᾧ ἀντὶ τοῦ διότι 
λέγουσιν ᾿Αττικοί, οἷον ἐφ᾽ @ TAY κλοπὴν εἰργάσω (‘because you com- 
mitted the theft’) «.7.A. 


134 EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS [V. 12, 18 


ἐφ᾽ ᾧ πάντες ἥμαρτον. Here lies the crux of this dificult pas- 
sage. In what sense did ‘all sin’? (1) Many, including even 
Meyer, though explaining ἐφ᾽ ᾧ as neut. rather than masc., yet 
give to the sentence as a whole a meaning practically equivalent 
to that which it has if the antecedent of 6 is ᾿Αδάμ. Bengel has 
given this classical expression: omnes peccarunt, Adamo peccante, 
‘all sinned implicitly in the sin of Adam,’ his sin involved theirs. 
The objection is that the words supplied are far too important 
to be left to be understood. If St. Paul had meant this, why did 
he not say so? The insertion of ἐν ᾿Αδάμ would have removed 
all ambiguity. (2) The Greek commentators for the most part 
supply nothing, but take ἥμαρτον in its usual sense: ‘all sinned 
in their own persons, and on their own initiative.’ So Euthym.- 
Zig.: διότι πάντες ἥμαρτον ἀκολουθήσαντες τῷ προπάτορι κατά γε τὸ 
ἁμαρτῆσαι. The objection to this is that it destroys the parallelism 
between Adam and Christ: besides, St. Paul goes on to show 
in the same breath that they could not sin in the same way that 
Adam did. Sin implies law; but Adam’s descendants had no law 
(3) It is possible however to take ἥμαρτον in its ordinary sen# 
without severing the connexion between Adam and his posterity. 
If they sinned, their sin was due in part to tendencies inherited 
from Adam. So practically Stuart, Fricke, Weiss, &c. There 
still remains the difficulty as to the connexion of this clause with 
what follows: see the next note. 


It is a further argument in favour of the view taken above that a very 
similar sequence of thought is found in 4 Ezra. Immediately after laying 
down that the sin of Adam’s descendants is due to that malignitas radicts 
which they inherit from their forefather (see the passage quoted in full 
below), the writer goes on to describe this sin as a repetition of Adam’s due 
to the fact that they too had within them the cor malignum as he had: Et 
deliquerunt gut habitabant civitatem, in omnibus facientes sicut fecit Adam 
et omnes generationes eius, utebantur enim et ipst corde maligno (4 Ezra iii. 
25 f.). Other passages may be quoted both trom 4 Ezra and from Afoc. 
Baruch. which lay stress at once on the inherited tendency to sin and on the 
freedom of choice in those who give way to it : see the fuller note below. 


13. ἄχρι γὰρ νόμου κιτλ. At first sight this seems to give a 
reason for just the opposite of what is wanted: it seems to prove 
not that πάντες ἥμαρτον, but that however much men might sin 
they had not at least the full guilt of sin. This is really what 
St. Paul aims at proving. There is an under-current all through 
the passage, showing how there was something else at work 
besides the guilt of individuals. That ‘something’ is the effect 
of Adam’s Fall. The Fall gave the predisposition to sin; and 
the Fall linked together sin and death. 

St. Paul would not say that the absence of written law did 
away with all responsibility. He has already laid down most 
distinctly that Gentiles, though without such written law, have 


V. 18, 14.] ADAM AND CHRIST 135 


law enough to be judged by (ii. 12-16); and Jews b fore the 
time of Moses were only in the position of Gentiles. But the 
degree of their guilt could not be the same either as that of 
Adam, or as that of the Jews after the Mosaic legislation. 
Perhaps it might be regarded as an open question whether, apart 
from Adam, pre-Mosaic sins would have been punishable with 
death, What St. Paul wishes to bring out is that prior to the 
giving of the Law, the fate of mankind, to an extent and in a way 
which he does not define, was directly traceable to Adam’s Fall. 

“ἁμαρτία δὲ οὐκ ἐλλογεῖται κιτλ. The thought is one which 
had evidentiy taken strong hold on St. Paul: see on iv. 15, and 
the parallels there quoted. 

ἐλλογεῖται : ‘brought into account’ (Gif.), as of an entry made 
in a ledger. The word also occurs in Philem, 18, where see 
Lightfoot’s note. 


ἐλλογεῖται (or ἐνλογεῖται) NC BC DEF GKLP, &c., ἐλλογᾶται NA: 

ἐνελογεῖτο N*, ἐλλογᾶτο A 52 1083; zmputabatur Valg. codd. Ambrstr. ad. 
The imperf. appears to be a (mistaken) correction due to the context. 
As to the form of the verb: ἐλλόγα is decisively attested in Philem. 18 ; 

but it would not follow that the same form was used here where St. Paul 
is employing a different amanuensis: however, as the tendency of the MSS. 
is rather to obliterate vernacular forms than to introduce them, there is 
perhaps a slight balance of probability in favour οἱ ἐλλογᾶται : see Westcott 
and Hort, Notes on Orthography in Appendix to Lntrod. p. 166 ff. 


14. ἐβασίλευσεν ὁ θάνατος. St. Paul appeals to the universal 
prevalence of death, which is personified, as sin had been just 
before, under the figure of a grim tyrant, in proot of the mis- 
chief wrought by Adam’s Fall. Nothing but the Fall could 
account for that universal prevalence. Sin and death had their 
beginnings together, and they were propagated side by side. 


On the certainty and universality of Death, regarded as a penalty, comp. 
Seneca, Wat. Quaest. ii. 59 Lodem citius tardiusve veniendum est... in 
omnes constitutum est capitale supplictum et quidem constetuttone tustissima. 
nam quod magnum solet esse solattum extrema passuris, quorum eadem 
causa et sors eadem est. Similarly Philo speaks of τὸν συμφυᾶ νεκρὸν ἡμῶν, 
τὸ σῶμα (De Gigant. 33 ed. Mang. i. 264). Elsew here he goes a step further 
and asserts ὅτι παντὶ γεννητῷ ... συμφυὲς τὸ ἁμαρτάνειν. For parallels in 
4 Ezra and Apoc. Baruch. see below. 

ἐπὶ τοὺς μὴ ἁμαρτήσαντας. A number of authorities, mostly Lat n F athers, 
but including also the important margin of Cod. 67 with three other cursives, 
the first hand of d, and the Greek of Orig. at least once, omit the negative, 
making the reign ‘of death extend only over those who had sinned after the 
likeness of Adam. So Orig.-lat. (Rufinus) repeatedly and expressly, Latin 
MSS. known to Aug., the ‘older Latin MSS.’ according to Ambrstr, and 
Sedulius. The comment of Ambrstr. is interesting as showing a certain grasp 
of critical principles, though it was difficult for any one in those days to have 
sufficient command of MSS. to know the real state of the evidence. Ambrstr. 
pies in this case the evidence of the Latin MSS., because those with which 

e is acquainted are older than the Greek, and represent, as he thinks, an 
older form of text. He claims that this form has the support of Tertullian, 


136 EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS ΙΝ. 14. 


Cyprian and Victorinus—a statement which we are not at present able to 
verify. He accounts for the Greek reading by the usual theory of heretical 
corruption. There is 9 similar question of the insertion or omission of a 
negative in Rom. iy. 19 (q.v.), Gal. ii. 5. In two out of the three cases the 
Western text omits the negative, but in ch. iv. Ig it inserts it. 

τύπος (τύπτω): (1) the ‘impression’ left by a sharp blow (τὸν τύπον 
τῶν ἥλων John xx. 25), in particular the ‘stamp’ struck by a die; (a) 
inasmuch as such αὶ stamp bears the figure on the face of the die, ‘copy,’ 
‘figure,’ or ‘ representation ’; (3) by a common transition from effect to cause, 
‘mould,’ ‘ pattern,” ‘exemplar’; (4) hence in the special sense of the word 
type, which we have adopted from the Greek of the N.T., ‘an event or 
person in history corresponding in certain characteristic features to another 
event or person.’ That which comes first in order of time is properly the 
type, that which comes afterwards the antitype (ἀντίτυπος 1 Pet. iii. 31). 
These correspondences form a part of the Divine economy of revelation: see 
esp. Cheyne, /sazah, ii. 170 ff. (Essay III, ‘On the Christian Element in the 
Book of Isaiah’). 


τοῦ μέλλοντος. (1) The entirely personal nature of the whole 
comparison prevents us from taking τοῦ μέλλ. as neut. = ‘that 
which was to come’ (Beng., Oltramare). If St. Paul had 
mtended this, he would have written rod μέλλοντος αἰῶνος, (2) 
Neither is it probable that we have here a direct allusion to the 
Rabbinical designation of the Messiah as ὁ δεύτερος or ὁ ἔσχατος 
᾿Αδάμ (1 Cor. xv. 45, 47). If St. -Paul had intended this, he 
would have written rod μέλλοντος ᾿Αδάμ. (3) The context makes 
it clear enough who is intended The first representative of 
the human race as such prefigured its second Great Repre- 
sentative, whose coming lay in the future: this is sufficiently 
brought out by the expression ‘of Him who was to be.’ ὁ 
μέλλων thus approximates in meaning to ὁ ἐρχόμενος (Matt. xi. 
3; Luke vii. 19; Heb. x. 37), which however appears not to 
have been, as it is sometimes regarded, a standing designation 
for the Messiah*. In any case τοῦ μέλλοντος = ‘ Him who was to 
come’ when Adam fell, not ‘ who zs (still) to come’ (Fri, De W.). 


The Effects of Adam’s Fall in Fewish Theology. 


Three points come out clearly in these verses: (1) the Fall of 
Adam brought death not only to Adam himself but to his 
descendants; (2) the Fall of Adam also brought sin and the 
tendency to sin; (3) and yet in spite of this the individual does 
not lose his responsibility. All three propositions receive some 
partial illustration from Jewish sources, though the Talmud does 


* ‘The designation “The Coming One” (//adéa), though a most truthful 
expression of Jewish expectancy, was not one ordinarily used of the Messiah.’ 
Kdersheim, Z. G& 7. i. p. 068 


V. 12-14.] ADAM AND CHRIST 137 


not seem to have had any consistent doctrine on the subject. 
Dr. Edersheim says expressly: ‘So far as their opinions can lhe 
gathered from their writings the great doctrines of Original Sin and 
of the sinfulness of our whole nature, were not held by the ancient 
Rabbis’ (Life and Times, ἄς. i. 165). 5111 there are approxima- 
tions, especially in the writings on which we have drawn so freely 
already, the Fourth Book of Ezra and the Apocalypse of Baruch. 


(1) The evidence is strongest as to the connexion between Adam’s sin and 
the introduction of death. ‘ There were,’ says Dr. Edersheim, ‘two divergent 
opinions—the one ascribing death to personal, the other to Adam’s guilt’ 
(op. cit. i. 166). It is however allowed that the latler view greatly pre- 
ponderated. Traces of it are found as far back as the Sapiential Books: 
e.g. Wisd. ii. 23 £ ὁ Θεὸς ἔκτισεν τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἐπ᾽ ἀφθαρσίᾳ... . φθόνῳ δὲ 
διαβόλου θάνατος εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὸν κόσμον, where we note the occurrence of 
St. Paul’s phrase; Ecclus. xxv. 24 [33] 60 αὐτὴν (sc. τὴν γυναῖκα) ἀποθνή- 
@xopev πάντες. The doctrine is also abundantly recognized in 4 Ezra and 
Apoc. Barwch.: 4 Ezr. iii. 7 εἰ ἀπε (sc. Adamo) mandasti diligere viam 
tuam, et praeterivit eam; et statim instituisti in eum mortem et in 
sationibus (= generationibus) eius: Apoc. Baruch, xvii. 3 (Adam) mortem 
attulit et abscidit annos eorum qui ab eo geniti fuerunt: ibid, xxiii. 4 
Quando peccavit Adam et decreta furt mors contra eos gui gignerentur. 

(2) We are warned (by Dr. Edersheim in Sp. Comm. Apocr. ad loc.) not 
to identify the statement of Ecclus. xxv. 24 [33] ἀπὸ γυναικὸς ἀρχὴ ἁμαρτίας 
with the N. T. doctrine of Original Sin: still it points in that direction; we 
have just seen that the writer deduces from Eve the death of all mankind, 
and in like manner he also seems to deduce from her (ἀπὸ yuv.) the ¢rz/zum 
peccandi. More explicit are 4 Ezra iii. 21 f. Cor enim malignum baiulans 
primus Adam transgressus et victus est, sed et omnes qui de eo nati sunt: 
et facta est permanens infirmitas, et lex cum corde populi, cum malignitate 
radicis; et discessit guod bonum est, et mansit malignum: ibid. iv. 30 
Quoniam granum seminis malt seminatum est in corde Adam αὐ initio, et 
quantum impletatis generavit usque nunc, et generat usque dum ventiat area : 
bid. vii. 48 (118) O'tee guid fecisti Adam? Si eniin tu peccasti,non est 
factus solius tuus casus, sed et nostrum qui ex te advenimus. 

(3) And yet along with all this we have the explicit assertion of responsi. 
bility on the part of all who sin. This appears in the passage quoted above 
on ver. 12 (ad fin.). To the same efect are 4 Ezr. viii. 50h Non enim 
Altissimus voluit hominem dis perdi, sed tpsi quit creati sunt cotnquinaverunt 
nomen etus gut fectt eos: thi. 1x. 11 gue fastidierunt legem meam cum adhuc 
erant habentes libertatem. \sut the classical passage is “μος. Baruch. 
liv. 15, 19 St enim Adam prior peccavit, et atiulit mortem super omnes 
tmmaturam ; sed ettam illi quit ex eo nati sunt, unusguisque ex ets pracpa- 
ravit animae suae tormentum futurum: et tterum unusquisque ex δ2: 
elegit sibt gloriam futuram ... von est ergo Adam causa, nisi animae suae 
tantum ; nos vero unusquisque Juit animae suae Adam. 

The teaching of these passages does not really conflict with that of the 
Talmud. The latter is thus summarized by Weber (A/tsyn. Theol. p. 216): 
‘By the Fall man came under a curse, is guilty of death, and his right 
relation to God is rendered difficult. More than this cannot be said. Sin, 
to which the bent and leaning had already been planted in man by creation, 
had become a fact ; the “‘ evil impulse” (= cor malignum) gained the mastery 
over mankind, who can only resist it by the greatest efforts; before the Fal] 
it had had power over him, but no such ascendancy (Uebermacht).’ Hence 
when the same writer says a little further on that according to the Rabbis 
‘there is such a thing as transmission of guilt, but not such a thing as trans 


138 EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS [V. 15-21 


mission of sin (Zs gibt eine Erbschuld, aber keine Erbstinde),’ the negative 
proposition is due chiefly to the clearness with which the Rabbis (like Apoc. 
Baruch.) insist upon free-will and direct individual responsibility. 


It seems to us a mistake to place the teaching of St. Paul in toc 
marked opposition to this. There is no fundamental inconsistency 
between his views and those of his contemporaries. He does not 
indeed either affirm or deny the existence of the cor malignum 
before the Fall, nor does he use such explicit language as 205 
vero unusquisque fuit animae suae Adam: on the other hand he 
does define more exactly than the Rabbis the nature of human 
responsibility both under the Law (ch. vii. 7 ff.) and without it 
(ii. 12-15). But here, as elsewhere in dealing with this mysterious 
subject (see p. 267 below), he practically contents himself with 
leaving the two complementary truths side by side. Man inherits 
his nature; and yet he must not be allowed to shift responsibility 
from himself: there is that within him by virtue of which he is free 
to choose ; and on that freedom of choice he must stand or fall. 
--- END VERBATIM ---
