Indeed, while we must say that God has made all creation so that each part of it reflects something of his own character, we must also now affirm that to picture God as existing in a form or mode of being that is like anything else in creation is to think of God in a horribly misleading and dishonoring way.
This is why God’s jealousy is given as the reason for the prohibition against making images of him: “For I the Lord your God am a jealous God” (Ex. 20:5). God is jealous to protect his own honor. He eagerly seeks for people to think of him as he is and to worship him for all his excellence, and he is angered when his glory is diminished or his character is falsely represented (cf. Deut. 4:23–24, where God’s intense jealousy for his own honor is again given as the reason for a prohibition against making any images of him).
Thus God does not have a physical body, nor is he made of any kind of matter like much of the rest of creation. Furthermore, God is not merely energy or thought or some other element of creation. He is also not like vapor or steam or air or space, all of which are created things: God’s being is not like any of these. God’s being is not even exactly like our own spirits, for these are created things that apparently are able to exist only in one place in one time.
Instead of all these ideas of God, we must say that God is spirit. Whatever this means, it is a kind of existence that is unlike anything else in creation. It is a kind of existence that is far superior to all our material existence. We might say that God is “pure being” or “the fullness or essence of being.” Furthermore, this kind of existence is not less real or less desirable than our own existence. Rather, it is more real and more desirable than the material and immaterial existence of all creation. Before there was any creation, God existed as spirit. His own being is so very real that it was able to cause everything else to come into existence!
At this point we can define God’s spirituality: God’s spirituality means that God exists as a being that is not made of any matter, has no parts or dimensions, is unable to be perceived by our bodily senses, and is more excellent than any other kind of existence.

TY  - BOOK
TI  - Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine
AU  - Grudem, Wayne
CY  - Grand Rapids, MI
ET  - Second Edition
PB  - Zondervan Academic
PY  - 2020
SE  - 221–222
SP  - 1586
KW  - Religion--Christian ministry--Pastoral resources.; Religion--Biblical reference--Handbooks.; Religion--Christian living--Devotional.
ER  - 
